
================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Know When It’s Time to Leave?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins. And this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders, who’ve had a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting, focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Rebecca to maintain her confidentiality. She’s a C-suite level executive working in private equity backed companies and has over 20 years’ experience in corporate finance. She likes to fix things and she likes a challenge.
MURIEL WILKINS: Rebecca is facing a problem. Earlier in her career, she stayed at companies for long periods of time. But in the last few roles she’s had, she keeps wanting to leave. And something about that just doesn’t feel right to her.
REBECCA: The challenging things for me is when I’m tasked, I get to fix things. And I get in there and there’s all these sacred cows. What I typically do is I tend to then devolve into this, “I can’t fix this. I can’t fix this.” So, if nobody’s going to listen and I can’t fix it, then I got to move on to the next thing, and where’s my next job coming from. And then I go into another fix, and then I find myself in the same situation. So, I can’t really cope yet. I haven’t figured out how to lean into the discomfort.
MURIEL WILKINS: Rebecca, isn’t sure if she’s leaving too quickly, giving up or being a quitter, or if she just hasn’t found the right company and role yet.
REBECCA: What I would like to see is I would like to see myself able to see it through. I would like to be able to see through this role to a successful exit or a partnership, a company transaction, or a sale, and actually stick with it, not take my tequila shot and say, “I’m out of here.” But just to take my tequila shot and say, “Let’s start again tomorrow.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the question for Rebecca is, how do I see things through even when the going gets tough? Which made me curious about what her experience had been so far.
REBECCA: In the last six years of my career, I’ve moved into these executive type roles, primarily into a CFO roles at private equity backed companies. I really enjoyed these roles. They give me a chance to flex my work muscles and do things that I enjoy. But at the same time, I found myself in this pattern of when I hit a brick wall, then I just throw in the towel and say, “Okay. I’m moving onto the next gig.” And every time I say, “This is the one.” And here I am again. And I’d really like develop some skills to stick it out and find out what’s going on and why I’m leaving so quickly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Got you. And so, in the first part of your career, what did you enjoy about those roles and what led you to stay?
REBECCA: I think that in those two companies, every 18 to 24 months, I would go to my supervisor and say, “I’d really like to do X, Y, Z now, this project to work with this department.” And they’d say, “Okay, go and do it.” And I go and I get new activities, good accomplishment, good achievement. And then I go onto the next one. And it really was the reason I really left after the 10 year one was because I run out of places to go, run out of things to do. So, I said, “Well, let me see what else is out there.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And what led you to take more of these CFO at PE backed company type of roles? What led you down that path?
REBECCA: I loved that it was a completely blank canvas, and it was like the company was in a little bit of chaos. And so, it mirrored my previous excitement at the other companies where there was something that really needed to be addressed, and I could go in, and I could roll up my sleeves and address it and get success for the company.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Got it. And has that been your experience in the different roles that you’ve been in?
REBECCA: Primarily, yes. That’s what I see. If it’s not broken, then I don’t want the job. I like jobs that have some chaos because I like putting processes and procedures, and getting people on teams that they’re excited, and they feel like they have something to go for. I was a college athletes. So, it brings back that like, “Let’s go team.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, when you were a college athlete, what did that look like? What was your role on the team?
REBECCA: So, by the time I was in college, you go from being the best player in high school to, I was probably the middle tier. I really took my role as I’ve said, “Well, I’m going to be the one that practices the hardest. I’m going to finish every sprint first.” And I spent a lot of time with my teammates saying, “Okay. Everybody gets a class. Let’s get places on time. Give it all you got at practice.” So, my role was always like, let’s get everybody moving in the right direction so we can win.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). And when things got tough there, what was your role as the team player?
REBECCA: Well, when things got tough, my first year in, I quit the team. So, I said, “Well, I don’t like the way this is going. I’m just going to quit the team and just go right on to be a student.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And after you quit or left the team, then you had three or however many more years left of college. How did you feel about looking back at your one year basketball college career?
REBECCA: Well, after first year and my coach asked me, “Hey, will you come back for a second year?” So, I came back the second semester of my sophomore year. I felt like it was the first time in my life in the classroom that I found like, I started to finally be rating success in the classroom. So, I said, “Okay. Well, let me go in this direction.” Because I played sports my whole life, and that was my focus. I’m like, “Well, let me go do the fun stuff in the scholastic atmosphere.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I didn’t mean to go to your basketball college career, but it feels a little familiar to what you said is happening on the work front. Because if I’m hearing you on the work front, it sounds like what you’ve experienced recently over the past six years is being somewhat of a nomad, in that some place seems exciting. You go there, it seems fun, then something happens, and then you say, “Not so fun anymore. Don’t like this. I’m moving on to the next.” And great for you, there always seems to be a next ready, right? Well, I mean, you’re crossing your fingers, but literally it’s happened six times.
REBECCA: It has.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s pretty good.
REBECCA: It has.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s a pretty good track record. Right?
REBECCA: Well, I’m waiting for [inaudible 00:07:15]
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re way past the three times a charm.
REBECCA: I am.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, or it’s, obviously you have something to add a value that people want, and it’s no similar to what happened with your basketball career in that you left the team, and then your coach came coming back and said, “Hey, will you come back?” Right?
REBECCA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: The question is, what drives you to the side to move on, one. And two, the challenge that you’re coming with is, how do you stick it out, even when things get “hard” or uncomfortable? And so, I’d like to ask you, why stick it out? Why is that even important for you? Why not keep moving when something doesn’t seem comfortable or right for you?
REBECCA: It’s important for me to stick it out for a couple of reasons. Sometimes I want to see through the sale of the company or an acquisition of the company. So, I feel like I will get the company 80% there and I’ll say, “Okay, they can finish the rest without me. I’m going to move on to something more exciting.” There’s something I do question myself that I say, “Okay, I’m going to move on because this is uncomfortable.”
REBECCA: And I think sometimes I want to stick it out to show myself that maybe for once I made the right decision. Sometimes I’m like, “Do I just have a really bad picker with jobs? Or I do I not have good coping skills?” I think I want to show myself that I can actually finish something that I’ve started.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, talk to me about situations you’ve been in where it got you to the decision point of wanting to be like, “Peace out, I’m out.” What are the conditions in place that lead you to then say, “I’m at 80%. I’m going to move on to the next.” Or as Ariana Grande would say, “Thank you, next.”
REBECCA: I love that. I think there would be maybe a couple of different things. There’ve been a couple of times when I’ve had a micromanaging boss. I was like, “I am out of here very quickly.” I would say a couple other times were places that despite my best efforts to ask the questions during the interview process, they were places that were looking for, 80 to a hundred hour weeks round the clock. And I said, “I’m not doing that.” Once I got in, I’m like, “I’m not doing that.”
REBECCA: And the third, that was probably the one that probably sticks with me the most is that I’ll do these projects and get all these good wins, and I’ll get to the next project, and I might get a note or, “Hey, the company is not ready to do X, Y, Z.” Or, “Let’s do a different strategy.” Either, it won’t be the right time for the company or there won’t be the buy-in that I’m accustomed to getting. And I think I’ll say to myself, “Well, if there’s nowhere else for me to go here, then I’ll go and do it somewhere else.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Got you. So, there seems to be, at least from the conditions that you’ve spelled out, the micromanaging boss, which is an external condition that you don’t really have full control over, the 80 to 100 hour work weeks that you weren’t able to vet for in advance. And then there’s this third layer of you having had successive wins in your role at that company, and you’re ready for the next win, but then there’s a blocker or a staller that says, “No, we’re not going in that direction.” Right?
REBECCA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you see like, “No, no, no, no, we should go in this direction because it’s another win.” And they’re saying, no. Okay?
REBECCA: Yeah, that’s correct. And it’s really common in this space, the private equity space. Someone will call you every couple of weeks and say, “I have a new role. Are you interested?” So, when I hit that roadblock, I say, “Okay. Well, I can just go over here.” And I start to all of a sudden, I know when I go to LinkedIn and I put click the box, that I’m now open to recruiters, that for me is always that like, almost like a relapse, if you will, “Can I go? I’m ready to go again.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, when you hit that box or when you start saying, “Ready to go on to the next.” What are your expectations going into the next?
REBECCA: That’s a great question. My expectations are, “Let me go to a blank canvas, where they really need me to sort things out, because where I am, they don’t need me that much anymore.” I will say like, “I’ve tackled a lot of the things that they wanted me to tackle. So, now let me go to another place that now needs me again to tackle their projects.”
MURIEL WILKINS: “And so, they don’t need me anymore.” What evidence do you have that that’s the case?
REBECCA: That is a great question. I’m probably telling myself that. I think usually I associate someone saying no to a project or, “We don’t need this project.” To saying no to maybe to me. And so, I’ll say, “Well, if you’re going to say no to me…” This sounds so terrible. It makes me look at myself like, “Really, you really need everyone to say yes to you all the time. It’s ridiculous.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sounds like what you have identified as your success pattern or your success metric is when people say yes to you.
REBECCA: That’s all the point.
MURIEL WILKINS: Or when you get the win, right?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: Or even the way you described what your experience was in the classroom, when you went to college, you said, “All of a sudden it became fun because I was starting to excel academically.” So, you’re defining your own success as the wins, right?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: The achievement. And look, there is nothing wrong with wins and achievements. We all want them. The question is, how closely are you identifying with it, so that when they don’t happen, you then translate it as, “Oh, if somebody is blocking my win, it means that they don’t need me anymore.” I can understand why you are where you are, because your whole career has been this constant, “Well, here’s a place where you can add value. And here’s another place where you can add value.” And it’s always associated with an achievement or a milestone, or something that needs to be fixed. And so, the question becomes as an executive, as the CFO, when that is taken away, then how else can you add value?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: One of my favorite quotes is, we don’t live our lives, we live our patterns. In Rebecca’s case, she’s living the pattern of only being as good as her next win. It’s no wonder every time that win seems threatened, she’s out. So, if her goal is instead to see things through, even when a win is not insight, she has to break the cycle. But first she’s got to be honest with herself as to whether that’s really what she wants. So, I asked her just that.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think there’s a season for everything. You’re just living one season and not willing to see the next. It’s almost like, you want summer, whatever your favorite season is. I don’t know what your favorite season is.
REBECCA: Summer is great one.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Summer is mine too. But it’s like, “Oh, summer is over, shoot. Here comes fall.” No, no, no, no, no. You know what? I’m going to go like, “I just want it to be summer all the time. So, let me resist that fall is coming and winter is coming.” And knowing that at some point summer is going to come again, but in the meantime, I’m like, “Oh, let me be out. I’m leaving.” Right? Not believing that summer is going to come again. Okay? And then I move to the next place and it’s like, “Oh, here it comes winter. Okay. Well, let me move again, right back so I can keep it summer.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And look, there are people who do that. These are the people who constantly are going from, I’m from New York, so like New York to Florida, Florida to New York, back and forth, so they can stay in summer all year round. That’s their choice. Okay?
REBECCA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: But they can’t say that and say, “But you know what? Gosh, sometimes I really would love to just experience winter.” It’s not going to happen. You got to make a choice. You got to stay in a place where it’s going to be winter for you to experience winter. Okay?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think the first place to start is, Rebecca, what is it that you really want?
REBECCA: As I evaluate it, I do want to develop that skill on myself, where a winter will come and say, “Okay. Well, let me get through this winter and let me get to know what these people, myself, what we’re really made of in a time where it’s not so summery outside.” So, I do want that. I think I get so uncomfortable that I leave, but I’m also, it was easy five years ago because every job would say, “We’ll give you 30,000 more. We’ll give you 30,000 more.” And everybody would escalate it. And now I’m sitting at this top echelon. And so, and I’m an executive. And I don’t have a whole lot of other places to go, so I need to develop the skill to stay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. And what it sounds like is, for a while now, what has retained you are external conditions that would, I don’t even want to use the word comfortable, but that were good rationale to stay. Right?
REBECCA: That’s it, rationale every time.
MURIEL WILKINS: And after a while you check the box, check the box, say, “Okay. I’ve gotten the higher comp. I’ve gotten the title. I’ve gotten the nice office. I’ve gotten those benefits and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.” But I’m still not comfortable. Right? Which tells you that that comfort level has nothing to do with what’s happening externally, it all has to do with you internally. Okay?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I want to go back to, what is it exactly that makes you uncomfortable? Going back to the, this when people say no, because it sounds like, and I don’t even think it’s just when people say no, when it seems like there is a barrier to what you define as success. What is uncomfortable about that?
REBECCA: I think a lot of my career, I have almost felt like a salesperson, if you will, like a salesperson of projects. And I think it’s, I didn’t get the sale or I failed, I lost the deal. Or it’s, I really, really wanted somebody to see what it could have been.
REBECCA: And I think it’s, I’ll see a blank canvas and then I’ll say, “All the way to the end of what it looks like.” When the company is in great shape with good leadership, and this project is done. And I think it’s having to let go of what I hope would be. And so, instead of letting go of what I had seen, I just say, “Well, fine, just let me erase that. It doesn’t feel good. Let me go see a vision somewhere else.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay. So, the source of much disappointment is when we have a grand vision of what could happen and it becomes our expectation of what should happen, and then it doesn’t happen. And so, what do we do? Right?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: And your, what do we do? Is to say, “Okay. Well, then I’m just going to move on to the next, and see if I can make it happen there.” Right?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: And then it’s, we go through the same routine. Now, I’m not suggesting in any way that you shouldn’t have a vision and that you shouldn’t have a sense of what you would like to see happen. Right? That’s part of your role as a leader in any company.
MURIEL WILKINS: My question is how tightly do you hold onto that vision that when it doesn’t necessarily happen in the way that you envisioned it, your only option left as of now is to totally abandon it and completely move away from it.
REBECCA: I mean, I think there were two things that you said that really resonated with me. And that was when I see a vision of what could happen, I start to internalize it as this is what should happen. And so, I get really married to it. And then when it doesn’t happen, it’s this giant letdown. And so, maybe instead of holding it a little more loosely, like this is one of the paths that we could take, I look at like, this is one of one and that’s it. And I think something else that was an aha, was that I will leave. And the exact same thing will happen again. We hear so many times the definition of insanity, doing the same thing over and over, and expecting different results. I think I’m looking at my vision and getting so entrenched in it, that I leave and then it happens, and then I leave. So it’s, how do I adjust that vision to be an option, not an absolute.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. How do you adjust that vision? Because adaptability is really the muscle that needs to be built. And how do you create other options for yourself? Right? There’s an author and psychologist by the name of Dr. Shefali Tsabary, she articulates it in a really nice way, where she says, for any given situation, you really have three options. Option number one is to stay and accept, right? Option number two is you stay, but you change your response to the situation. Notice, I didn’t say change the other, meaning change the board, change the managers, change your response. Option number three is to do exactly what you’ve been doing, so it’s not a wrong option is to leave. You have excelled at leaving.
REBECCA: Yes. I can simply say I’ve mastered number three.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Which again, I mean, I will tell you that usually is the one that’s really hard for people. Okay.
REBECCA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, right now, if indeed you are motivated by being able to demonstrate that you can have longer tenure somewhere.
REBECCA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you were to stay, if you’ve reached that point where it looks like winter is coming, right? What are your options that would allow you to stay?
REBECCA: I think it is probably sitting down with my boss, who’s the CEO. And I would say, “Hey, I saw us going on a trajectory. Okay. Now, that we’ve changed from path A to path B, how can I make myself the most useful? And what can I do to our future partner to make sure that we perhaps feed our highest sale price to that partner?” Or that I learn a bunch of skills within the M&A sector, I may not have learned because I jettisoned out so quickly, how do I take the next year and really learn a lot of great skills, so that I’m best suited. So, I mean, now that I talk that out, it makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a step back here. Through our conversation, Rebecca becomes more and more aware of how her strong expectations for what should happen, drive her to leave when they don’t happen. There’s nothing wrong with having expectations, but when held as tightly as Rebecca does, it can cause tunnel vision rather than the openness and adaptability leaders need to see the options available to them. Now, that Rebecca knows she has choices, she can decide which move best serves her in the long run. To do that, I asked Rebecca about her sense of purpose. What is her why?
REBECCA: My sense of purpose internally is to show myself that I’m able to grow and not just stay stagnant. I think my purpose with my team is to see an entire deal through. And instead of just investing in people’s lives for one year and then saying, “It was nice to know you. I’m out of here.” So, what I’ve cobbled together are all these really temporary relationships. It’s developing deeper connections. I think it’s gaining confidence of a board, “She took us all the way through an exit. She was here with us in the good times and the bad times. And she’s just somebody you can count on through thick and thin.” So, I think it’s really the personal growth and the deepening connections with other people. And I think particularly for me, it’s with the CEO that I wasn’t his fly by night, fix it on this consultant type role that left, and left it for the next person. But yeah, she was my right hand all the way to the very end.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what I’m hearing you really articulating Rebecca, is a redefinition of the type of leader that you would like to be.
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative). That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And again, no judgment on being the leader who is the, I think you said fly by night, but fix it, come in, fix it, and move on to the next. look, being the turnaround person. Right? But what I’m hearing you say is, “That’s what I’ve done and I’ve enjoyed it, but I really have a yearning to be the through thick and thin, “I’ll stick by you.” The long run. Stick by my team. Stick by the CEO. Stick by the board. Stick by the company to try to get it to where it needs to be for as long as I possibly can. It doesn’t mean for eternity, but for a long enough time. Okay?
REBECCA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, that’s what you’re pivoting to. And that’s what you’re saying, “Hey, you know what? After all these years in my career, and I’ve had multiple successes, I really want to try to be that leader.” Then you need to align yourself with that vision of what you have for you as a leader.
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, there’s a notion of what you do in this moment, how you act in this moment, the decisions you make in this moment, the way you behave in this moment, inform how you show up in the next moment. Okay?
REBECCA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you take that and expand that to your leadership, if how you want to show up five years from now, is as the leader, who using your words, the leader, who stuck with it through thick and thin, how do you need to show up today, this week, and the next month, and the next six months in order to increase the probability that that’s what you will show up as in the long run.
REBECCA: So, I think for me now, when I go to a meeting and something isn’t adopted or there isn’t the buy-in that I’d like to see, I think instead of in the back of my head or the front of my head saying, “Lobby out of here anyway.” I think it’s to say, “Okay. Let’s focus on the things that we are adopting and let’s focus on those three tasks, and let’s start to really optimize and implement those, and see where those take us. And then after that, let’s see what’s next, what’s the next step that we’re going to take that people will want to go in that direction.”
REBECCA: And I think it’s instead of going to the staff or some of my smaller groups and saying, “Well, I didn’t want to do this. So, we have to figure out what that means.” I think it’s, instead of taking that mentality, it’s saying, “Okay. Listen, the great news, we got buy in on three or four things. Okay, let’s start attacking this head on.” And it’s looking at the 80% and 90% wins and diving head deep into those instead of sitting with that 10% and saying, “I’m out.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. I mean, I think that it’s very interesting that when you said it, because you said, when you’re in those meetings and you hear the like, “We’re going in a different direction.” Or, “This is what you’re going to do.” In your head, your mindset, the operating assumption is, “I’m going to be out in a year.” And so, because you have this operating assumption of, “I’m going to be out in a year.” Then you behave in a certain way, right?
REBECCA: That’s exactly right.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re like, “I’m not going to pay attention.” Or, “Let me go tell my team, but I’m going to do it half-heartedly.” So, I would be curious if your operating assumption, whenever you hear something that is contradictory to what your vision of success or where you thought you should be going with the company, if your operating assumption, instead of it being, “I’ll be out in a year.” If you shifted that to, “I’ll be here in a year.” What difference would that make?
REBECCA: I think the difference is instead of disregarding it and checking out of the conversation, if it were, “I’m going to be here in a year.” So, while we’re not going down X path, we are going down this alternative path. So, what am I going to do to make sure that this alternative path is the best it can possibly be for the financial health of this company? And whomever we sell to, how can I make sure that I’m all in on this alternate path?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
REBECCA: So, I think you’re right, it’s a simple phrase. Instead of saying, “I won’t be here in a year.” Saying, “I will be in here. So, what does this mean that I’m going to do to make sure I do it right?”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. And underlying it is, how much commitment are you willing to give it today? Now, it doesn’t mean it’s forever. Notice, I didn’t say, what if you’re here in 10 years? I don’t want to stretch you too much. Right?
REBECCA: That’s a bit much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s start with baby steps. But if it’s a year, and even though you’re not… Who knows what’s going to happen in a year? We don’t know. But our assumptions or what we think about it, help drive again, what’s the next step we take forward? And all we can look at is, okay, so that if you’re right now like, “Okay. I’ll be here in a year. So, what am I going to do next?” And then the next time something happens, you ask yourself the same question. And you ask yourself the same question until maybe one day you’re like, “You know what? I’m not going to be here in a year.” Right? But get into a practice of at least asking both, right?
REBECCA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are the different scenarios? Rather than staying stuck in this automatic exit strategy before the going gets really, really tough.
REBECCA: Yeah, I do. And I think reminding myself, just because my personal focus is to grow some roots, and maybe roots look like two to three years in private equity. But I think for myself in that meeting, when I say, “I won’t be here for a year.” It’s telling myself, “Yeah, but you’d be at another board meeting.” And you’d be saying, you wouldn’t be there in a year either, because you’d be at the next board, and you’d say the same thing. So, if you want to get out of the cycle and instead of saying, “I won’t be here in a year.” Saying, “I am going to be here and what am I going to do? Because this is going to be different than before.”
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s also a lesson of how do you reach this intersection between what is your individual purpose, right? And commitment to self, which you absolutely need to have. And what is the organization’s purpose or the organization’s purpose, the company’s purpose and your commitment to the company? And when you are particularly in a leadership position, it is very unsustainable when there’s not an intersection between the two. And then you have to ask yourself, “Okay. What still keeps me locked in?” But it’s going to change. It’s no different than a relationship
REBECCA: But it’s going to cycle in and out of… I think back to the company that I did work at for 10 years, I think back to in a three-year period, there were some 50 year awards for people that have worked there for 50 years. And they started when they were 15, and here they were in their mid sixties, retiring. And I remember thinking like they spent all that time here and all they’re getting is this card and this cake. And I thought, “I am not going to be sitting around for a card and a cake.”
REBECCA: And I think it’s really, like you said, I over-indexed on, “No, I’m not going to do a card and a cake.” But now I have to tell myself, “Look, you’ve gotten where you wanted to go. You wanted to do C-suite roles.” And I think for me too, is now I’m leading groups of people that I really care about. And what does that saying about me? That I’m not emulating it all for them to put the company’s goals and strategies even into their purview. And if I want to model these things to find that intersection, that’s really poignant to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And look, I mean, yes, it’s very endearing to say, “What am I emulating to others?” But I would suggest you really start with, what are you emulating to yourself? You’ve shown a really great track record of Rebecca as being true to yourself in terms of what’s important to you. I love it, when you said, “I’m not going to stick around for a piece of paper and a piece of cake.” Right? That’s not going to work. At least, give me the watch. Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’ve been very true to herself. And I don’t think that necessarily changes in this notion. I think again, I think what you haven’t explored is what does it mean to be true to yourself in these circumstances? What does it mean to be true to yourself when what you want is to stay?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you a question. Let’s just imagine that this current gig you’re in, let’s imagine that you’re there two years, three years from now, let’s say three years. How would you define success three years from now for yourself? And the conditions are, you’re still, you’re there. Right? So, what would success look like?
REBECCA: Success for me would look like I can have high performing teams and some deep industry connections that lasts. That I have a longer term bond with my CEO. The thing that keeps coming to my mind is success to me is when something goes wrong, I don’t say, “I’m out of here.” It would say, “You know what? I’m not the shiny new penny here anymore. I’m not impressing all the people anymore. I’m just here being a Steady Eddie. And it’s really working for me.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And have you had other times, whether it’s work-related or not work-related in your life where you’ve done that effectively, meaning it was difficult and you still stuck with it?
REBECCA: Yes. I would say that I have had that in my marriage. Obviously, it does always go right. And you want to move here, I don’t want to move here. These kinds of things. And I would say in one particular job where I was there for 10 years, there were times where they like, “This won’t work.” I have done it a couple of times with the success.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. When you stuck with it.
REBECCA: When I stuck with something and been able to stay for the long haul. And it felt really good. In relationships in the beginning, it’s like, oh, you’re falling in love. And you want to stay on the phone all night, and say like, “You like the color blue? I like the color blue.”
REBECCA: But I always say, I wouldn’t trade the deep into the double digit years of a marriage for just knowing someone, forgetting them, for someone being able to look at you and saying, “I’ve got you.” And I always say, but I think in work, that’s what I’ve done. I’ve gone for all these first dates.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You’ve gone for all the first dates. I mean, gosh, wouldn’t we all have that.
REBECCA: Well, yeah, and I think that’s become my default is like, swipe right. Somebody will love me for a year.
MURIEL WILKINS: I love it. Swipe right. Right. So, I mean, you have lived the fantasy. And good for you that it’s lasted so long. And it’s not to say that you have to go through difficult times. That’s not what this is about. It’s that we also don’t want to live in a fantasy. We want to live in reality. And the reality is there are going to be good times, “good times.” They’re going to be “bad times.” I don’t even want to say good or bad times. It just is the nature of how companies run. Right? There’s going to be, business is cyclical just like nature. I mean, we talked about the seasons, just like the seasons. Right.
REBECCA: And it’s like earning seasons. You have good earnings, you have bad earnings.
MURIEL WILKINS: You have bad earnings. Do you calibrate who you are and what your success is based on the seasons of what is happening externally from you, or do you calibrate it based on what your own north star and what it is that you want and desire, or where you see yourself in the moment, or for the foreseeable future? Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Something that you’ve said Rebecca, over our conversation is that what also attracts you and really charges you is the ability to continue to learn and to grow. And you even, when you talked about marriage, you said, “I wouldn’t trade in the years for the ability to see somebody.” And that person to see you and to be able to grow with that person, and for you to grow in that relationship.
MURIEL WILKINS: And there’s something to be said for any type of relationship, whether it’s with a company or whether it’s with a person that the true measure of success is not necessarily in the longevity of it, it’s in your ability to grow, right? And in your ability to continue to evolve as a leader, evolve as a person, so that you’re contributing to yourself, but you’re also contributing to others. And how we define that growth is what’s critical.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve defined that growth as a series of first dates, the transactions. And all we’re talking about here is it may be time for you to redefine what growth looks like. My guess is if you’re redefining your growth as being able to see something through, being able to nurture the connection, being able to model over the long-term to your staff, that a natural outcome of that will be your desire to stay. So, not necessarily making the staying the longevity, the 10 year cake and plaque, the milestone. That’s not it. It’s based on what you now see as your purpose as a leader, your growth as a leader, does it make sense for you to stay?
REBECCA: Mm-hmm (affirmative). A hundred percent. A hundred percent. I mean, I think that’s right. And I think it really, it makes a lot of sense when you say, the way I’ve been doing it, it’s not a bad thing. People make careers out of that, but because I want different, then I have to think different, and see myself different.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
REBECCA: And that’s to say like, “Okay. It’s time to get a different mindset because I want personal growth and I want to grow into this kind of leader.” And that’s what I want and I’m going to do it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So often people are stuck with this question of, “Is it time for me to leave?” They stay in situations that don’t feel like a good fit or don’t fulfill them. Here, Rebecca faced the opposite issue, when is it right to stay? And more importantly, how do I stay when it feels like I’m in the thick of it? But at the end of the day, it really comes down to the same core issue, asking yourself the same questions, what do you want? What kind of leader do you want to be? And how do you align your decisions and actions with that? Okay. Only when you take a step back and uncover what really drives you, and where you want to be driving towards, can you discern whether it’s time to stay or go regardless of the season.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
NICK:
I had three interactions with a woman in my department whom I have worked for many years where they got very upset at me. And I realized that, Hey, there’s something wrong that I’m doing over here. It’s like, maybe I could be completely wrong over here, but I’m trying to think what the, what caused it
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who’s sharing their journeys.
If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show, apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter at Muriel M Wilkins, or on Instagram at Coach Muriel Wilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends and subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 2: Am I Approaching My Female Coworkers the Wrong Way?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Nick,” to protect his confidentiality. He’s a leader in the medical field and has been a hospital chief for over a decade. It’s a role that involves a lot of people management over and beyond his clinical responsibilities. He’s viewed himself as someone who’s pretty good at interpersonal relations. It’s something he’s gotten positive feedback on in the past. But more recently, he’s been surprised by how some of his interactions with female colleagues have gone. And while he’s considered himself a supporter of gender equity, he now wonders if he’s part of the issue, and even more so, what he can do about it.
NICK: But gender equity is very good in our hospital, including amongst leaders. And I see myself interacting with women in different positions in my own department, in my own group, and I want to see how to make that better because at least two instances sort of caused me to rethink how I’m thinking about my interactions and whether I’m sensitive enough to understanding the reactions or what I say, am I listening enough? Should I be listening differently to a man and a woman?
MURIEL WILKINS: In the last few years, issues related to diversity, equity, and inclusion have risen even more to the forefront, making it hard for leaders to ignore. And while there’s much talk about how to deal with gender equity at an organizational level, there’s still a lot of discomfort in talking about how it plays out interpersonally between men and women at work. It’s not an easy thing to come forward with an issue like this, and it’s certainly not one that can be wrapped up in a pretty bow in one coaching session. But it’s one we wanted to tackle because it’s a challenge that honestly probably a lot of men face. They’re telling themselves. “I feel like I’m walking on eggshells. Am I interacting with women colleagues in the right way? Am I being sensitive enough or overly sensitive?” Before diving into the specifics of Nick’s current situation. I wanted to hear what he thinks makes him an effective leader.
NICK: I think I get along with people very well. Generally people trust me and I think that has helped a lot.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why do they trust you?
NICK: I really don’t know [laughter].
MURIEL WILKINS: They just do.
NICK: I think maybe I keep things simple and straightforward. I don’t try to complicate stuff. I work almost 50 percent clinically in the forefront so whatever I’m asking them to do I do myself. So the time actually I overwork so that I do enough clinical work because I know that I cannot do this forever. It takes a lot of energy, enthusiasm, and I’m very conscious of the fact that I lead a team of professionals who are experts in their own rights and I’m not the one to boss over them, I’m the one to sort of shepherd them, guide them, fight for them, advocate for them. We have four divisions in our department, the divisional chiefs report to me. Then there are other things that I do for the hospital, like you have to sit on committees. Equity, diversity and inclusion is something very new that we’ve started, so started to do that more formally within the department.
MURIEL WILKINS: First of all, it sounds like you have a lot on your plate, right? So when you look at sort of the portfolio of responsibilities that you have in your leadership role, what are the areas that you are drawn to and then what are the areas where you do them but with a little less affection?
NICK: Teaching comes very naturally to me. Doing clinical work comes naturally because that’s what we trained for all of our life, right, as a doctor. Interacting with people is great fun, it’s amazing to listen to people’s stories. And often what you see on the surface is not what it is. What I find really challenging in this role, taking care of finances. The other aspect which is difficult is change management, like for everyone else. I’ve be successful in some divisions within my department to bring about change and some not so much. So those are some challenges, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So currently, so we’re sitting here having this conversation, what do you see as the leadership challenge that you’re facing right now? What brought you here today?
NICK: I found that I had three interactions with women in my department, whom I worked for many years, where they got very upset at me. And I realized that, “Hey, there’s something wrong that I’m doing over here, it’s like maybe I could be completely wrong over here.” And I’m trying to think what the worth/cost is. So, first of all, it could be the way I said it and did it. I think in one instance, I’m pretty sure about that because I reached out to my HR colleague who’s a woman and who has good insight into human relations and human resources and stuff like that. The other two instances are a little bit surprised at the reaction, I didn’t expect that, and I said maybe I’m doing something wrong over here. We are not sensitive enough. I’m doing in my old style, my old way, where maybe the sensitivity has to be different. The #MeToo movement has changed a lot, right, that’s my perception and also the stress of COVID. There’s a lot of personal stressors that people have felt. This is a question I even asked him about the VP of my organization, she’s very experienced, she’s phenomenal. So I asked her once that when I give feedback to people who report up to me, do I have to change it based on gender or race and other things?” And she said, “Well, that’s a tough one. I don’t know how to answer that,” and she said she’ll think about it and get back to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Very, very smart person. So I just want to make sure that I sort of understand the situation and the circumstance that you’re in and then the key question that you have, right? So it sounds like what’s happened is you’ve had some circumstances, more recently, so it doesn’t sound like this has happened in the past, it’s been recent?
NICK: This is over the last one and a half years.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And it sounds like what’s happened is you have shared some feedback or shared some news with female colleagues and you were surprised by the way that they responded to you and that you found that they got upset with you. And so your question is, do you need to change the way that you communicate with or approach your female colleagues as you move forward?
NICK: That’s correct. So in two instances, it was feedback. And one instance was a conversation based on other issues.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right, and before we dive into some of those situations, just so I can get a little bit of color, why is this important to you right now? Why is this even a question that you want to answer for yourself?
NICK: Because I pride myself on having considered gender equity all my life. My mother was very educated, and we were not well off in the beginning but even in those years in the ’50s, she had a Bachelor of Arts Degree so she was very well educated. And then I consider my wife to be a phenomenal person who brings a lot to the table. In fact, she’s of immense help to me in whatever I do, and it sort of shook me up a little bit when I had those reactions.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it shook it up in what way? What was shook?
NICK: I thought I was doing something wrong, which I’m sure that there is a different way to approach things, which I don’t know what exactly wrong I was doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. While Nick was blindsided by how his interactions with his female colleagues played out, he’s taking a very important step and putting the focus of this discussion on him, and thereby owning his part. Of course, every interaction has two sides to the story. And most times people expend their energy on blaming the other person. “Why did she get emotional? Why did she take it the wrong way?” Versus turning the lens on themselves. So the fact that Nick is willing to do this is key in being able to eventually get to strategies. Another critical point here is why he wants to address the issue? What’s his motivation? If he’s simply doing it because he’s checking the box, his actions will not be genuine or sustainable. But in his case, Nick’s motivation lies deeper than that in his sense of purpose. Leaders have to realize that if they truly want to move the needle on equity issues, they have to find a purpose in it, rather than approaching it as an HR requirement. So with these things in place for Nick, he was now ready to unpack this challenge some more. But before we did that, I invited him to approach it with a bit of a different mindset.
MURIEL WILKINS: So before we dive in, I want to sort of offer something to you as we have this conversation, okay? Your colleague, who you went to and asked for some suggestions and she said, “Oh, that’s a tough one. Let me stop and think about it.” And I said, “Smart person to respond that way.” It is tough, and I think maybe what I’ll offer is just a gentle suggestion that you don’t look at this for yourself as right or wrong. Can you shift from this assessment that you have had of yourself around, “I am good at dealing with women,” right, which I think is what your belief has been, and now something has shook that up, to I am always learning on how to deal with other people, in this case, female colleagues? Many times we get shook up in how people respond to us, particularly when something has worked for us for so long because we actually think we’re good at it. There is no good, right? You’re just continuously learning. And I think this is an area that, obviously, you’re going to continue to grow on and hopefully you’ll learn something out of this conversation. So just that slight shift, if you can move away from right or wrong way. And more, “what do I still need to learn?”
NICK: So let me tell you the one where I think I have a little bit insight. So one of our professionals, who is a very high achiever, very organized, really in the top 10th percentile of such people in the world. One day, came to me and said that, “I want to do this and this project,” she needed time for that, like half a day a week, plus she’s going to use our own time, one day in the weekend. It was going to take about a year for her to do that. We talked about it a little bit, and then I sort of suggested that, “You are very busy, you have achieved a lot. I’m not sure that you really need to do this because a lot of your personal time into this. Though I don’t want to prevent you from doing it, I want you to consider whether this really is something you want to do.” So the person was pretty insistent that this is what they want to do and I said, “Are you sure because it might impact your family life.” And that caused a reaction which was pretty intense. The person got very upset at me and started giving examples of how organized a person, is, what time they come in, how they never miss anything at school or PTA, and stuff like that. So I obviously backed up and I said, “Listen, that was my opinion but if you want to do it, go ahead and do it and we will support you.” We did support it in little bit financially and also in terms of giving time and stuff like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: What part blindsided you there?
NICK: She got really upset saying that, “You don’t know how organized I am, how I can manage things, and how I do things,” and this and that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so what surprised you about that?
NICK: I thought I was really trying to help her or prevent her from overworking herself. But contrary to that, she got upset at me I thought and so that was what surprised me that I was reaching out for her, but she didn’t get that. I was judgmental and saying that she could not do this and it will impact her family. So that is what caused the problem.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so I’d like to deconstruct this a little bit because the first thing that I picked up on what you shared is you were surprised by her reaction, and the surprise was that she got upset when what you were trying to do was actually be supportive, okay? And so the surprise reaction was her being upset. Now, whenever we’re surprised by somebody else’s reaction, it’s because we have an expectation that they will react a different way, okay? That literally is the difference between being surprised and not being surprised. So what did you think she was going to do by your intent on being supportive?
NICK: I thought she would reconsider her plan because it was going to be very intensely busy for her for the next one year or so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so you thought she would reconsider it and you described what actually happened is her being upset. So what adjectives would you use to describe how you would have thought she responded?
NICK: I was expecting her to be calm and composed about it and to explain to me why she would still want to do it or how she would manage the time or give up something else. That’s what I was expecting.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, understood. So what I want you to hold on there is there’s emotions that you’re expecting or not expecting on both ends, in terms of what you responded. And in actuality, part of you triggered an emotion in her, but she also owns her own emotion and you can’t control it. So you’re certainly contributing to how she reacted, but she also owns a part of it. So what we’re going to focus on is what is the part that you’re contributing. And there’s also this piece of can you really control somebody else’s response?
NICK: Probably not. Or not always.
MURIEL WILKINS: Probably not. You certainly can’t control it. I mean, look, we have a hard enough time controlling our own emotional reactions, how the heck are we going to control somebody else’s emotional reactions, right? So you can try to influence it, right? You can try to come in with the right energy and intentions that hopefully will result in the person being calm and composed, as you said. But it’s not all in your hands, okay? So the question is, how do you approach, in this situation, the conversation in a way that increases the chances of her responding in a more calm and composed way? And does that have anything to do, right, that’s the underlying question, does that have anything to do with her gender? So that’s the first part. The second part is you said it seemed like what she got upset about was your assertion around this impacting her work-life balance, right? When she went through that checklist, what do you think she was trying to communicate to you?
NICK: That she really, really wanted to do this.
MURIEL WILKINS: That she really wanted to do, why? Let’s sort of peel back the onion. Because why?
NICK: She wanted to climb the ladder.
MURIEL WILKINS: She wanted to climb the ladder, and what did she has to show for her ability to climb the ladder?
NICK: I thought she had done quite a lot already to climb the ladder without doing this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, when you sort of brought up the issue, it sounds—nd again, she’s not here for me to talk to you so I don’t know—but it sounded like she went back to, but look at everything that I’ve done, right? Look at all the effort that I put in. And you were focused on the goal. “Is it even possible for you to do that? Do you really want that goal?” Without acknowledging the effort that she had already put into place, okay? I will offer research that’s been done and resources around gender differences and how to talk to gender differences, with the caveat that it can lead to generalizations, right? So while we can talk about it from a gender standpoint, I want to be cautious of not making generalizations, okay? There was a book written awhile back by I don’t remember exactly the name of the book. I can get it to you but the authors were John Gray and Barbara Annis, I believe they’re the ones who wrote,
Men are from Mars, Women are from Venus
and then they wrote a book that was more focused on the workplace, okay? And one of the things that came up in their research, so they had done a ton of research around what is the difference in communication that happens between males and females in the workplace? One of the differences and they coined us having lack of gender intelligence, is that men tend to prioritize and sequence their work in their decisions and focus based on the results, rather than the efforts to get there. While women do care about the goal, right, clearly as your colleague did, but they also care very much about the effort and the process of reaching them. And so what this then translates into is how males and females in the workplace tend to feel appreciated. Males will tend to feel appreciated when their accomplishments are acknowledged, while women also want their efforts to be appreciated on the way to getting the goal.
NICK: Very interesting.
MURIEL WILKINS: So when I share that difference, how you translate that into the situation that you face with this particular colleague?
NICK: Now that I think about, it makes a lot of sense that. I should have spent some time acknowledging all the efforts that she’s put into whatever she has done and what she is going to do before having made any suggestions.
MURIEL WILKINS: And in order to acknowledge, what you need to do?
NICK: I need to rephrase and restate the achievements. I acknowledge that she put a lot of time effort in how successful she has been and give some specific examples of success to show that I really care about the efforts that she has put in, and even the results that she’s achieved there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And I think even a step before being able to acknowledge anyone around their efforts is your ability to listen to what their efforts have been, okay? This is the tension between do we drive straight to the solution or do we lead with the listening and understanding before driving to a solution?
NICK: Now that I think about it. Listening is one thing, acknowledging the efforts that she put in. I think the third part of it is also how I said it possibly. Instead of going straight to the point, asking it in question format like, how do you think you will manage work life balance with this, giving her an option to answer the question that I had in my mind or a concern that I had in my mind, instead of stating it out like that, which I think came across as a sort of a judgment on her ability to manage the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I want to highlight that I think it’s beneficial that you are defining this as a judgment, that it came across as a judgment. Correct me if I’m wrong, it sounded like you were trying to actually be equitable in that moment and say, “Hey, I want you to sort of consider what this means in terms of the other areas of your life.” But you did it without necessarily asking her, you did it by asserting it. And so the missing link here is, can you demonstrate understanding and acknowledgement before driving to a solution?
NICK: That is key I think, yeah, that’s good.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so when we talk about it in that way, do you see a common theme with some of the other situations that you’ve faced that have surprised you in dealing with some of your female colleagues?
NICK: Yeah I do actually yes. I think the same thing would work well to demonstrate understanding and acknowledgement before trying to reach a solution would have helped for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: And at the end of the day, it all comes down to the way that one views the situation. There’s an interesting statistic that says I think it’s like 82 percent of women feel some form of exclusion, 92 percent of men don’t feel they exclude women, right? I mean, you want to talk about living in two different realities? And so, if the goal in leading from an inclusive way is about understanding and making decisions and being informed based on what the others’ reality is, the place to start is to let go of how we view their reality and fully understand what is that woman’s reality?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so it all comes back down to, are you truly listening? You mentioned something very early on in our conversation when I asked you, “what do you think has led to your success and progressing as a leader?” And one of the things you said is that you like interacting with people, particularly because what you see on the surface might not necessarily be the meat of it, but it sounded like you like to get under the hood and really understand what’s going on. I mean, my goodness, that’s what your profession even forget that people, what you do as a living, that’s what it’s all about, right? It’s like getting underneath it to figure out what’s going on, right? And when you do that with your patients you do that why?
NICK: I think it makes a huge difference in outcomes that’s why.
MURIEL WILKINS: So the same goes here, the difference is now going under the surface and getting under the hood is understanding, “well what is this person believe about the situation? What efforts did she think it’s going to take? What does she think is important?” And listening for that, acknowledging it and then asking the questions to help them come up with their own decision, while still letting go of any expectation of what their response might be.
NICK: Yeah, absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, now, the other thing that you mentioned was makes this, I don’t want to dismiss it, is you said this has been more of a recency experience that you’ve had.
NICK: Now that I’m thinking more about it. In all these instances, I did not spend time preparing and thinking about it. And in certain ways, I was rushed. I realized that I’ve had many difficult conversations in the past, and I always prepared a script, thought about it. Now that you are talking about it, reflecting on this, all these instances where we’re going from one meeting to the next meeting to the next meeting, and you’re sort of trying to swing it on the fly. That could probably one of the problems, I suppose, now that I realized that listening was an important part of it—that’s true. Preparing for it is another important part of it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So this is something for you to know about yourself, right? That when you have the time to prepare, it allows you to actually create more openness. And so when you think about it ahead of time, it’s almost like your warmup. The situation hasn’t happened yet, it’s not going to replicate in the exact same way but it creates some openness for you, as a leader, to then say, “Okay, I have different choices in terms of how I deal with this. And I also can go in and knowing that there might be different responses.” Rather than this very closed way, okay? And, by the way, it’s very difficult for one to put themselves in a posture of listening to the other person and understanding the other person if they don’t come into it with an open stance—very, very difficult. Listening is an opening activity, not a closed. Driving to solution is a closed activity.
NICK: That’s a very good way of putting it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You also mentioned that it feels to you, and maybe this has changed over the course of our conversation I don’t know, but that contextually has something just in the way that conversations about equity and diversity and inclusion and the #MeToo movement have increased, how much has that contributed to what is going on. So what are your thoughts there?
NICK: I think there is an increased sensitivity to how people are being spoken to. Seriously, I haven’t trained myself properly in all the language for equity, diversity, and inclusion. And then I realized that we have to train ourselves on how and what we say. And when I speak to several other women in the department, some of them are not concerned at all, the other people, so there’s a divide. The other’s are like, “Yes, of course, we have suffered for so long, it’s time for us to move beyond this and for people to understand, the world to understand everything that’s happening.” So I can see that that change has come around. At least when I converse with women in my department informally. I have some close friends of mine talk to, to try to get the feedback.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so for you as a male, walking through and leading through a time now when there is an increased focus on equity and inclusion and diversity, and you’re hearing on the one hand, some people say, “Yes, it’s time for people to learn a new language,” and you’re like, “Okay, I just want to make sure I say the ‘right thing’”, and then you’re hearing from other people like, “It’s okay. Just move it on.” I’m just interested in hearing like, how does that make you feel? On a day to day basis how do you experience that?
NICK: I’m not sure yet but I’ll tell you, the more people talk about it, the more you become sensitive to it. I’ll give you my own experience. Just a few weeks back I was listening to a very, very intense talk from one of our EDI [equity, diversity, and inclusion] leaders at the University, and she is known for speaking direct and making you feel uncomfortable. She was speaking to a group of leaders and as she was talking about racist comments and all that, suddenly I started thinking about the things that I faced earlier on, which until now, I did not even consider or think about race seriously. But then I realized that, that is what happened to me. I was saying, “Damn, that’s correct what’s she saying, this happened to me.” Thinking about those situations that I faced—previously I just ignored, I just brushed them under the carpet. Now when this person was speaking about it so openly and making people uncomfortable in the audience, and I’m thinking, “Yes, this happened to me too.” And of course I forgot about if the next day. But that really came to the forefront, right? So that’s why I think it’s very important—the people who don’t worry about it a lot out are. So I consider myself to be in a position of privilege, because these things have happened to me they’re not really impacted me in my life. Whereas, there are people whom it may have made a difference to. So I think there are two parts to this,it’s not like there’s wrong or right it is that there’s a reality to this that we have to face.
MURIEL WILKINS: There is a reality to this that that we have the face and you are in a position of leadership and power.
NICK: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So beyond your own individual experience in terms of how you face it, there is also around what message do you send, based on your leadership position, around how you face it? And so this is actually where, from a leadership standpoint, it’s a little more complex because it’s not just your individual experience. How you respond to these situations is not just representing Nick, okay? It’s representing leadership for your organization. And what is the organization’s approach to these differing realities that people have? Differing experiences. And so you have used the word being sensitive that you think you need to be more sensitive and I’m just curious, what does being sensitive actually mean?
NICK: Yeah, maybe I’m not using the correct word, but being more understanding of the current context, how people may feel about things that are said or done, though the intent is not that. So just being very, I’m coming back to the word sensitive, but being very careful how we put things and how we address things. That’s what I mean.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Okay, so what I’m hearing you say is really increasing your capability to understand. We keep coming back to this word, understand. Increasing your capability to understand how the other might be experiencing what is going on in the here and now, so that you can then adapt and be adaptable as a leader to how you respond, what solutions you bring to the table, how you communicate, whatever it is that’s required of you. That actually is quite different than being sensitive, right? Whenever I think of the word sensitive, I sort of think about, what is your tolerance for putting your finger on a hot plate? Sensitivity is just how much can you feel it so that it raises the awareness that something is hot? So it is a level of awareness. So yes, we want you to be sensitive so that your level of awareness around what might be triggering or what the reality of that female colleague might be, we want the time between the situation and it happening, that level of awareness to go up at a quicker pace than it has in the past. But awareness just for the sake of awareness is notihng. So I’m going to offer you to move beyond the goal of being more sensitive. You’ve demonstrated sensitivity, you wouldn’t be here if you didn’t have the antenna on it. But and then what? Sensitivity to what and for what, okay?
NICK: So go on to understanding and start adapting and communicate better, listen better.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think I wouldn’t be doing you justice by ignoring the fact that if we sort of take it to a broader picture and the environment in which you’re operating, the context in which you’re operating where the conversations about equity and inclusion and diversity have been raised to the forefront over the past two, three years with the #MeToo movement and then Black Lives Matter movement, it indexed higher than it has for a couple of decades, right? Doesn’t mean the conversation hasn’t been there, it’s just raised to the surface. And organizations are starting to pay attention to it, which mean leaders have to pay attention to it. So I don’t want to dismiss that piece of it because that is sort of the ecosystem under which these individual meetings that you’re having are happening. And so on the one hand, it requires you to be more sensitive, as you said—really to be more understanding and adaptable, that’s really what it is, okay? And on the other hand, those who have faced those inequities for a long time have probably reached a point where they feel like they can actually voice those frustrations or those experiences that have been suppressed for so long. And so understanding that, that what you might be interpreting as an emotional reaction has nothing to do with the situation. I mean, the situation is triggering it, but your colleague’s “emotional” reaction to us saying, “Hey, do you really think this is something that you’ll be able to handle given your personal life?” It has to do with you asking that question, and it also has to do with probably what she has experienced for years and years and years beforehand. I mean, here’s the thing, right? I think part of what many people are experiencing, and you’re not alone in all of this right, and I say this without judgment one way or the other or without any assertion of whether it’s a good or a bad thing. But I think a lot of people are behind closed doors sort of feeling like it is very uncomfortable that they have to watch what they can say, what they can’t say, and it almost feels like they’re walking on eggshells, right? And part of it is, particularly in a leader position is being becoming comfortable with that discomfort, okay? And the reason why is because you have to understand that the causality of having to now be careful what you say to the other is because the other has had to do that for a very, very long time, right? There was a time when women could not talk about their children in the workplace,out of fear that, “Oh my gosh, is it gonna ruin my career?” and this, this and that. So understanding that there’s actually a very mutual experience here, okay? And so hopefully, we get to a place where nobody has to walk on eggshells. Why? Because we have an increased understanding of the other. All right, so let’s try to synthesize for you. I’d love to hear what your key takeaways are and moving forward, how this conversation will help inform your leadership?
NICK: The most important thing was to go into it with an openness of understanding, learning what they really want to do and going in with having options in place, not just jumped to a solution is what I hear. Listening very well and I think that is something, I think there’s something that one needs to relearn, listening skills, given that I may have lost it in getting very busy over the last one and a half years dealing with COVID situations, which were pretty intense. But getting back to the basics of, you know, it’s all about people, so really understanding them again in a way that I used to do I think in the past. So a lot of common sense behind it but approaching it in a methodical way in the stages like you explained.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so what’s great about this Nick is, I don’t think it’s very different than what you have done in the past, in other areas, in different circumstances, right? So that’s something not to lose sight of is that it’s not—while it’s new, it’s not completely new.
NICK: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But thank you—thank you so much for bringing this.
NICK: It was very good, thank you very much.
MURIEL WILKINS: No matter what we’d like to believe about ourselves, everyone has their own biases that they bring to the workplace. And for leaders like Nick, it’s important to recognize their bias, to tackle them, and constantly be reflecting on and questioning your own assumptions and behavior, and whether they truly promote diversity, equity, and inclusion, or do they work against it. And it also means being able to enter any situation with a level of openness to the other person’s experience, and the ability to adapt accordingly, regardless of what your own experiences. And that is part of the journey of walking the talk as a leader who wants to truly embrace DEI [diversity, equity, and inclusion]—being able to walk into a room and open up a conversation instead of narrowing and closing it off, is something that’s key to being a successful leader. And these are lessons to apply with anyone you work with.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time:
NAOMI: Just having always put one foot ahead of the other and not really stopping to think what is it that I really want to want to do, as opposed to like, this will help me get to my catapult me to the next point in my career or this will catapult me to break that glass ceiling. It’s like not really stopping and say like, is this something that I really want, as opposed to just focusing on that prize at the end?
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you, and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And you can find me on LinkedIn on Twitter @murielmwilkins or on Instagram @coachMurielWilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, This is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 2: Caught in the Middle
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months. But on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest, who we’ll call “Diane” to retain her confidentiality, is an experienced leader heading up a nonprofit organization as its executive director. She’s intensely mission-driven, and over the span of her career, she’s worked really hard to infuse her organization with a culture of inclusion. She now faces a common problem, feeling caught in the middle between the person she reports to and those she leads.
DIANE: Where I’m incredibly challenged right now is that because I have built an organization where everybody’s voice counts and everybody needs to speak their mind and is encouraged to share how they’re feeling and what they’re experiencing, we’re currently in this very uncomfortable position where my team is having issues with the founder who is a very, very wealthy white man.
MURIEL WILKINS: Diane identifies as a white woman and has a long-standing commitment to being an anti-racist leader. And here she finds herself caught in the middle between her staff and her boss, with the added complexity of racial-empowered dynamics that exists between the founder, a wealthy, older white male philanthropist, and her team, who are younger people of color, all at a time of rising racial tensions that are too explicit to ignore and are playing out in every workplace across the country.
DIANE: It’s very challenging, and as somebody who’s always considered herself very, very good at navigating this particular challenge, I am struggling right now with how to get them to all feel safe talking to one another so that we can move our organization forward. Because this right now feels like we’re weighing ourselves down. We have to build a healthier team, and we have to have a team that is communicating with one another and not through me as the middle person.
MURIEL WILKINS: I wanted to dive in with Diane and help her work through this web of interpersonal dynamics and move closer to what she envisions for her organization. She shared how a sense of purpose and a desire to do the right thing had always been a guiding force in her career. The issue now is how does she do the right thing in leading her organization through these differences rather than stay stuck in the middle. So let’s get started. As we pick up the coaching conversation at the point where Diane shares her view of what’s been happening.
DIANE: I generally consider myself somebody who is very driven and has a strong moral compass and a very strong sense of what is right and what is wrong. I’ve always relied on that and trusted that and trusted that you could pretty much flash anything in front of me and it’s not going to distract me from that moral grounding and from what I truly feel is good and bad and right and wrong. And I just generally have a sense of myself that I can do anything that I decide to do and that if I just devote all of my energy and efforts to it, I’m not going to fail myself and I’m not going to fail in the job.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Why don’t you share a bit around, as succinctly as you can, what the challenges that you’re facing?
DIANE: The challenges in my current role are around staff interactions and around my role in a leadership position as a white woman leading a team of people of color and reporting to a white man. I am challenged in bridging the gap in those interactions between the folks that report to me and the folks that I report to, especially in that we’re serving a community that is almost exclusively Black and brown.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so I feel like I’m entering the rim of a party here and let me just make sure I understand all the characters that are here. So we’ve got you, white woman brought up, using your words, in a privileged upper middle class white town, right?
DIANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: We have the person you report to, white male. And then we have your staff, and it sounds like it’s a diverse, but people of color primarily.
DIANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then we have your constituents, the people who you serve, who are people of color.
DIANE: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is that right?
DIANE: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: I get it. Sounds like a great party to go to. Okay, share with me a bit around what does that look like every day. What are the dynamics that occur?
DIANE: Speaking specifically about the dynamics on my team, I pride myself on making sure that I have an inclusive team and that I have created an environment where we can talk to one another openly and honestly about anything and especially around topics having to do with race. While I thought I was doing a lot of good in initiating and having those conversations, what has ended up happening is that my staff are having the conversations with me, but they’re not willing to have the conversations with my boss. My boss does and says things on occasion unintentionally that are microaggressions or otherwise make my staff feel very uncomfortable. What happens when that happens is that my staff bring them to me and I am sort of that central hub where everything lands, and it is then my responsibility to bring them to my boss, but my staff doesn’t want to talk directly to my boss.
MURIEL WILKINS: So just help illustrate what’s happening here. If I was to fly on the wall and they come and talk to you or call you, what are they coming to you with?
DIANE: Yeah. My boss has a way of talking to people that can be highly directive and it can sound like, “This is exactly what I want to hear you write in this email,” and he’ll dictate the email to you. He’ll do that to me, he’ll do that to my staff. The difference is that when he does it to my staff, instead of feeling like I do, which is the sense of, “I’m not your administrative assistant, I am the leader of this organization,” their feeling is, “I’m not your slave.” And those are the words that they bring to me, “I am not your slave. You hired me to do a job in this organization, and that job is not to be your typist.”
MURIEL WILKINS: When that happened, what was your reaction?
DIANE: My first instinct was to commiserate and to say exactly what I just said, which is, “I know that that feels yucky, and I don’t even have the added layer of race built into it. It feels yucky to me when it happens. I know that I am of higher value to the organization than to be so highly directed and I understand why it feels yucky to you.” What I initially did with my team was I said, “I’m going to talk to him about it.” I have talked to him about it, about myself, and I’m going to continue talking to him about it. The more that I did that, the more they came to me essentially after every meeting we have that includes the whole team with another complaint. So now we’re at the point where I don’t think this is healthy. I need everybody to try to talk to one another, but I’m also not going to put staff in a position where they don’t feel safe.
MURIEL WILKINS: What does that mean to not feel safe?
DIANE: That’s a good question. It’s language we use all the time in social work, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure do.
DIANE: I think where they feel like there could be repercussions, there could be vulnerabilities exposed for themselves that they’re not comfortable exposing, where they feel like by virtue of having that conversation it is going to do them emotional harm. That’s my interpretation of what not feeling safe means.
MURIEL WILKINS: Have you asked them?
DIANE: I have not.
MURIEL WILKINS: So one thing you might want to explore is asking them what it means to feel safe. But if you don’t understand the lens through which they look at it, there’s no way you can help coach them to a certain action, there’s no way you can even imagine what kind of conversations they can have or how to process through this with them. So part of it is understanding this word safety, which is so important as you said, it’s used so often, you’re using it, you value it for your staff, and yet you’re interpreting it from your vantage point, which is a very different vantage point than they have. Let’s start with what does it even mean to be safe, which is another way of saying, “What are the conditions that would need to be in place for them to be able to have this type of conversation? If they were to have it, which we don’t know yet. The question that I have for you in terms of the dynamic that’s laid out right now is, how do you contribute to this? What’s your part in this dynamic?
DIANE: If I am in high stress mode, I am less likely to be sensitive to the things that my staff are sensitive to. So I’m less likely to notice microaggressions. I am more likely to do microaggressions. I’m grateful to my staff when they point that out to me. I know that I’ve created an environment where they feel safe pointing that out to me in my own life and my own work, but I also have guilt about not noticing them when I am in a higher stress situation and not being able to see it in the moment and asking them to have to come back to me to show me.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so what does that guilt look like?
DIANE: It looks like that is something that I am proud of, it’s something that is in my identity. When I think of who I am and the work that I do, this is a huge component of it. Being an anti-racist leader, making sure that everyone has a voice and that everyone’s voice is heard, I take a lot of responsibility in a way that I probably shouldn’t be taking responsibility. As the white person in the room, it’s not my job to control who has the microphone. It’s my job to shut up and step back so that people can take the microphone. And yet, as the leader and a person who is in power by virtue not only of my whiteness but my role, I do control who has the microphone. Obviously, I have no control over how anybody feels, but I do get to either validate and create space for conversations like this or I get to say, “Shut up and focus on the work.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a moment to recap what’s going on here. At this point, Diane has shifted her focus from what her boss and her team are doing and is starting to unpack what role she plays in this dynamic. She describes feeling squeezed. Should she push her staff to speak up or does she let them be? Should she take control of the conversation or does she pass the mic to others? Should she shoulder the responsibility to address these issues on her own or does she share it? It’s not uncommon to go back and forth between these kinds of extremes in leadership dilemmas because we can see clear pros and cons of both sides. The key is to find the balance, and to help Diane do that, it would be helpful to explore what success would look like in this situation that she finds herself in. So let me ask you a question, what do you want? What would success look like for you?
DIANE: Success for me would look like a team that talks to one another and that there isn’t a direct line of communication through me. It would look like a team that feels comfortable and can have a meeting together that doesn’t have sub-meetings afterward, that doesn’t have a litany of complaints that come after every team meeting.
MURIEL WILKINS: And in the same vein, given the dynamic that you laid out, how do you think your team defines success?
DIANE: I think that if we asked my boss, he would say everybody is doing their job. I think he would be very focused on everybody knows their responsibility, they’re doing their job so that every cog in the system is performing at 100 percent capacity and we are producing. I think that if you asked my staff, they would say feeling like they could do their job well and have the resources to do their job well. I think that they would like the team to be, as I described it, as I want it. I think that my staff would very much like to feel empowered in the conversations that we have as a whole team.
Another dynamic that comes up when we’re meeting as a team is that I get overprotective of my staff and I jump in and step on their toes because I’m afraid of consequences coming down on them. So somebody on my team might start a thought or start a suggestion and I will literally interrupt and take it because I want the heat on me, I don’t want it on them. I also think that that does not good to them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. And when you do that, who does that help?
DIANE: I don’t think it helps anyone. It gives me a sense of control that comforts me. It gives me a sense of efficiency. I do it because in the moment I’m trying to help them, but I don’t know how clear that is to them. I also don’t know how productive that is to us as a unit.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, it’s really interesting to me because you talked a little earlier on about feeling squeezed, feeling kind of sandwiched in between all these parties or primarily between your boss and your staff, your team, and yet it feels like it serves a certain purpose for you.
DIANE: I think you’re absolutely right. That part of it is that I put myself in the position to be the middleman and to be the person sandwiched in between. I just generally think I can take more than other people. I don’t say that to sound arrogant. I’d rather things be on my shoulders than be on other people’s shoulders. It’s part of my character. I do it in my personal relationships, I do it at work, I do it all the time. In trying to protect my team in those environments, I’m creating a situation where their voice doesn’t get heard.
MURIEL WILKINS: So in a way, you are working against that thing that you want, which is these direct line of communications, right? Look, I mean, maybe that is what they want you to do, but we don’t know. That’s the whole mystery right now. I think a big piece of this is you checking in with them and meeting them where they are: what success looks like for them, what outcomes they’d like to achieve, so that then you can determine, “All right, so if that’s the case, what can I do?” It doesn’t mean absolving from your role as leader and saying, “Oh, well I’m just going to fully empower you, you deal it with it.” We’re not talking about that, but there’s some middle ground and right now it feels like you’re either all in, “I’m going to run interference, I’m going to protect, I’m going to save the day,” and the other side of it is to do nothing. There’s some area in between depending on the situation.
DIANE: Yeah, that feels very true. That sits with me as being something that just feels like you nailed it. It is good to be a buffer when a buffer is necessary, and it’s harmful to be a buffer when a buffer is not necessary. I think, exactly like you said, I’m working against what I actually want.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let’s take a step back here. Diane is now starting to see that when it comes to that stuck-in-the-middle feeling, she actually has options. With that realization, she can start taking ownership for how she has reinforced this behavior at times to the detriment of the culture that she’s trying to build. Now she can start focusing on what it is that’s within her control and help move the organization to more alignment between individuals instead of just trying to manage the differences between people. Let’s see what type of leadership approach Diane thinks would be best for her organization now that she’s had time to talk it out.
DIANE: So I think that no matter what we’re talking about here, it’s about two very different experiences on either end of the spectrum and about me feeling the responsibility in the middle of trying to keep the two different experiences and move us forward. I don’t think I’ve looked at any of this as a misalignment that I want to align. I think I’ve always looked at it as a misalignment that I have to work within and juggle and sort of satisfy both ends.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right, that’s right. And then so again, no wonder you feel squeezed. Goodness gracious. And so if you look at it in this new way, how is that different for you? So if we were to move away from the word responsible, how else could you describe the role that you play in trying to move to more of a fully-engaged conversation, moving to alignment rather than being in the middle?
DIANE: Maybe catalyst. Maybe I have to be the catalyst for the conversation. I have to encourage the discussion and the various roles that are going to get us to alignment, but I am not singularly responsible for that alignment.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, if you think about the difference between taking a stance of being responsible, which is literally taking things in, it’s bringing it into you versus a catalyst, there’s a difference in movement and action that it’s going to create as a leader. Part of the story that you’ve given yourself as a leader is you’re a responsible leader, which certainly has its place. I don’t want to denigrate that in any way. But if you were to shift to you’re a leader who’s a catalyst, it creates a very different ripple effect in your organization and in what you do.
DIANE: And I feel like it empowers everyone to take that energy and run with it as opposed to give it to me when it’s invited.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take that and say, “Okay, if you were approach this more as a catalyst, more as a person who cannot be the one who holds both sides and manages it, but rather tries to bring all sides together, let’s now take that into what options you have.” I want you to think about a most recent example or situation and how you dealt with it, and then we’re going to move to how you could have dealt with it.
DIANE: Sure. We had a team meeting where we were talking about a particular person. Person had a very distinctively Hispanic last name, and my team and I continued to refer to him by his first and last name. My boss at one point referred to him by another very stereotypical Hispanic name. In the moment it didn’t register for me. That did not in any way feel like a microaggression, it felt like he’s so bad with names. He’s really bad with names, and he’s always really bad with names, and I know that he’s bad. It could be a board member, it could be his doctor. After the call, the next day, a woman on my team called me and said, “That was really offensive. Felt like he was saying the name didn’t matter. It felt like he was saying that we all sound the same, we’re all the same, we all have the same names.” My response was to go like, “Oh my God, I’m so sorry. You’re right. I can absolutely see why that would make you feel that way. I’m so sorry you felt that way.” And then the next thing out of my mouth was to defend him and say, “I know that wasn’t his intention. He’s just really bad with names. That doesn’t change the impact on you, that doesn’t change that the way that felt to you felt really awful, but I can assure you it was not intentional.” I hear myself now reflecting back on how I responded to that and saying, “Look at me, I’m trying to straddle both sides.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, can’t you just see it? I have this vision of you holding both sides of the rope.
DIANE: Yes, yes, exactly. And so then I said to the staff member, I said, “Is it okay if I share what you shared with him? Is it okay if I bring that to him?” and she said, “Yeah, go ahead.” I said, “Do you want to be a part of that conversation?” and she said, “Absolutely not.” So I thanked her for bringing it to me and for feeling comfortable and brave enough to do that, and I brought it to my boss and he was like, “Oh, you know that’s not what I meant.” I was like, “I know that’s not what you meant, but I’m telling you what the impact was.” Then we have a whole conversation he and I about impact versus intention and why she might’ve felt that way and what he should do to fix it. I’m like, “You don’t do anything. You just don’t do it again.” But he’s going to do it again. He does it all the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so as a catalyst, let’s overlay it, when the staff member called you and shared with you what had happened, how else could you have responded?
DIANE: I think I absolutely could have responded without any kind of defense. I could have responded and said that, “I’m so sorry that you experienced that. I appreciate that you’re being brave and bringing this to my attention. How would you like to address it?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And what difference do you think that would make?
DIANE: It lets her tell me how she needs this dealt with instead of me assuming the right way to do it and taking the responsibility again for addressing it. It lets her hopefully continue to feel brave and heard.
MURIEL WILKINS: So part of empowering your staff is allowing them or having the conversation with them in a way that allows them to make choices. And it’s absolutely okay for her to say, “I don’t want to be part of that conversation.” It’s empowering to place boundaries, which is what she was doing at that time. And so you’re engaging in the problem solving. There are multiple ways you can do that with her, everything from, “Do you want to be part of the conversation?” “No, I don’t.” “Okay. Well, let’s play around with if you were part of the conversation, what conditions would need to be in place?” “Still don’t want to be part of the conversation.” “That’s not a problem either. So I’m going to have the conversation with the boss. What would make you feel comfortable there? Here’s what I’m thinking about saying. Does that work for you?” Engage them.
DIANE: That’s going to require me to slow myself down. I am such a problem solver, and I am somebody who sees the whole situation very quickly and just immediately jumps to what I think is the best conclusion and acts on it. What you’re asking me to do here is to be more inclusive in reaching that conclusion and slow myself down a lot.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, look, I am not an idealist here where it’s like, “Oh, now you’re just going to slow down and do nothing else and listen.” You got to solve problems. But it’s being able to discern when slowing down is warranted. And I think you know. I think you know. After everything we’ve talked about, what is your signal for knowing when you need to slow down and take on this catalyst form that’s not just about fixing and problem solving but also about leaning into it and being inclusive and listening and engaging? How will you know?
DIANE: I think it’s about when I feel myself taking the responsibility and feeling that being handed from somebody else to me and saying, “Okay, I own this now.” And it’s in that moment that I need to say, “No, wait. We’re going to share this, and we’re going to get there together.”
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s not absolution, right, because there is a sense of ownership. But rather than being responsible, I want you to lead, and there’s a difference. It’s a thin line, but there’s a difference. Leading is so much broader.
DIANE: That’s good. I feel like you should put that in a little meme all over Facebook or something.
MURIEL WILKINS: That is going to be you. That is going to be you.
Time to break down a bit of what is happening here. Diane has realized that the way she takes on responsibility, which is to basically run with it and fix it on her own, actually runs counter to what she really wants to be doing, which is to build a culture where others feel empowered and engaged. And as she changes how she views her leadership role, to become more of a catalyst for example, she could then see different ways she could support her team that will give them more of a voice and more agency even when they don’t feel comfortable being in the room and speaking up for themselves. And just as it’s important for Diane to determine how she can engage differently with her team, she also has to figure out how to do so with her boss because he’s part of that dynamic. So let’s go back and explore that with Diane. Now, when we talk about this catalyst piece and leading, let’s go to the other side of the equation because we talked about what that would look like with staff. What would that look like with your boss? So same scenario, how would you have dealt with it differently?
DIANE: That’s so much harder.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, in the first scenario, in terms of how you actually went through it, how did you take responsibility there? How were you the responsible one?
DIANE: I made it my job to make sure that he understands the impact that his microaggression had on our team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Correct me if I’m wrong, but if I play back what you shared about that scenario, he said, “Oh, but you know that’s not what I meant,” and you said, “Yeah, I know that’s not what you meant.”
DIANE: I made it my job to make him feel better about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly.
DIANE: Yep. I do that obviously in part out of fear and in part out of wanting to still be… liked is too strong a word, but wanting to validate his experience and to say, “I know that that’s not in your heart. I know you would never intentionally do that, but here’s the impact.” And I don’t need to do that. I don’t need to protect him.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you don’t need to protect him, not because you’re all of a sudden going to be this big badass I’m not protecting anybody, but more because it’s not necessarily serving your anti-racist agenda.
DIANE: No, it’s not at all.
MURIEL WILKINS: It runs counter to it.
DIANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if your role is not there to protect him, what is your role there to do vis-a-vis him?
DIANE: I think it’s to be there for him to help him process.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a difference between meeting somebody where they are and appeasing them.
DIANE: Because that diminishes her experience.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sure does. So you go again being the straddler, right, versus meeting him where he is would require what of you?
DIANE: It would require me to be braver, and it would require me to stand firmly in her experience and not justify one way or the other.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you need to ask him what the impact is he’s trying to make. Bring it back to the organization. Where does this fall in line with who we say we are as an organization? I think that’s when it comes time to depersonalize it and lift up to more of the systemic piece. You know through your anti-racist work, being a racist, it’s not at the personal level, it’s when you’re contributing to a system.
DIANE: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So yes, it has to do with him, but there’s so much more at stake. I think that’s the role that you can play, is to help reframe what’s at stake. It’s not about this one conversation. And that’s being a catalyst rather than responsible and taking it on and protective. Does that make sense?
DIANE: It makes perfect sense. I feel like I have to pick my jaw up off the floor.
MURIEL WILKINS: Can you do it? It can make sense, but I want to make sure you can do something about it.
DIANE: Exactly. I feel like I need you sitting on my shoulder in these conversations, and I just need to really stop myself and think about how I’m going to handle something and not just be so quick to react and to act.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, when we react, all it is going to our default, doing what we always do. I see a chocolate chip cookie, I pick it up, I eat it, that’s my reaction. The only way that doesn’t happen is if I slow down and say, “Huh, is eating that chocolate chip cookie in line with where I see myself six months from now?” I mean, forget six months from now, a week from now, okay?
DIANE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then I have a decision to make. Am I going to act in accordance with where I see myself or what I want for myself, or am I going to act in accordance to my past? That does take a certain level of slowing down so that you can make that choice. All I want you to see is you have choices around how you have these conversations. And so the slowing down for you is, “Am I having this conversation in a way that increases the probability of that happening? Or am I doing it in a way that takes us right back to where we’ve been for the past however many years?” What I would highly suggest is that you don’t just pick up the phone and call your boss and have this conversation, that you sleep on it. You spend 15, 20 minutes thinking through that, “How am I going to approach it? What am I going to say? What questions am I going to ask? What might he say back?”
DIANE: Yeah, this is so helpful. I just feel like allowing myself the time to just slow down and think about whether or not I’m actually walking the walk and not just talking the talk is where I’m going to be able to make the difference. Because I think that I can do it, I love that word catalyst, I want to be that way, and I think that if I really slowed down I can do that. I can look at this and say, “What’s my default? And then what would be the catalyzing role in this?” It’s going to be the initial hit pause on me that’s going to feel so unnatural. I just need to think about where I want to be and getting closer to that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now that you have this in your mind around something you want to do, and that this hit pause might be what’s difficult for you, that rather than waiting till something happens to hit the pause button that you get into a practice now of hitting the pause button. If in your calendar you have to schedule once a week that you literally have a 30-minute pause, maybe it’s at Friday at 3:00 or it’s at Tuesday at 8:00 AM, but it’s this literal pause where you sit and you think and you reflect and you deal with some of these issues that we’ve talked about. You think through, “Okay, let me imagine if I were to have a conversation with my boss, with my staff member, with my team, or maybe I have one coming up, how am I going to approach it?”
DIANE: Yeah. I love the intentionality of that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I think you’ll feel differently than you have. So I would be interested in hearing, I’m going to put you on the spot and maybe we can practice a little bit if you want to pause before you respond-
DIANE: Okay. Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: … what you’re taking away from this, what are your key takeaways and what you’re going to try as a result of this discussion?
DIANE: I think that my number one takeaway is that it is not my job to be responsible for everything that happens in my organization. It is my job to be a catalyst for everyone to have shared ownership and responsibility and that my role as a leader is to bring a team together in a shared vision. It’s not to dictate the vision as I see fit to different people. The things that I’m going to try, I mean, of course, I’m going to hit pause and slow myself down so that I can think about how I react and respond to each situation and be very intentional in the work that I do so that I am aligning it with the vision that I have for our work and for all of us as a team. I need us to be aligned, and I need to no longer feel squeezed and stuck in the middle. I think that one of the things that you’ve taught me is that the only way to get there is together. It’s not anything that I am going to do as an individual that’s going to get everybody there with me.
MURIEL WILKINS: By the end of my coaching session with Diane, she had moved from focusing on what her team and boss need to do to what she needs to do to be a catalyst for better communication. While this is different than how she’s led in the past, she’s now clear that it’s the right thing for her moving forward to build a healthier culture where all voices truly are at the table. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next Time…
SPEAKER 1: That generation has a different background in terms of where they were raised, in terms of the thinking and what they were exposed to. So I know definitely that my way is not the right way or the only way. So for me, it is to try and get the best of my generation and the best of their generation so that we can, again, achieve that full potential.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Get Through My Mid-Career Crisis?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
. Part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve had a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Today’s guest is someone we’ll call, “Naomi,” to protect her confidentiality. She’s a lawyer and has followed a pretty traditional career trajectory from law school to a big firm to an in-house counsel job. But even though she acknowledges she’s done well for herself, she’s feeling unsettled.
NAOMI: At times I feel like I’m going through a very stereotypical midlife crisis, and I’m definitely wondering, it’s like, what’s left for me? What do I really want? Am I happy? I feel like I’m not that happy, but yet I’m not really unhappy. And you just kind of feel lost.
MURIEL WILKINS: Naomi got to where she is today by following a certain blueprint that always led to the next accomplishment. Now she’s unsure of what’s next and she’s seeking clarity.
NAOMI: Hopefully for me, it’s quieting some of the noise that’s buzzing in my head, that’s clouding my decision-making process. Sometimes when my thoughts are like lasers that are dispersed and, I hopefully, maybe could fine tune it to get a little bit more clarity, so that I can go through this process in my head and feel good about what my next steps are.
MURIEL WILKINS: And while Naomi has acted with certainty throughout her career, she now finds herself at a point in time when she’s really unsure of what to even ask herself to clarify what’s next. So she begins by reflecting on what has led her to where she is today.
NAOMI: I come from a family who value education. And I’m pretty proud of the fact that I feel, even though my family is an immigrant family, we’ve all really prioritized education and trying to do the best for ourselves in terms of personal development, career trajectory, whatnot. It was expected to me to go to graduate school because everyone in my family has gone to graduate school. My brother, just to one-up me, got an MD and a PhD. He’s the annoying one in the family.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s always one of those. I’m trying to figure out if I was the annoying one.
NAOMI: Hey, nerds are cool now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
NAOMI: It’s okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s all relative.
NAOMI: Right. So like a good daughter, you study hard in high school, you go to a college that you think will prepare you for a good career. And then I went to grad school and tried to go to a good grad school and then get a job. And then you just keep climbing that corporate ladder, and just up, up, up, up, up. So that’s where I am at now. Especially, and I’m sure the pandemic has caused a lot of people this self-Reflect to the point you ask yourself, “Where am I going? What am I doing? Is this really where I want to be?” And I feel like I maybe didn’t do a lot of that when I was ascending my career path because it was just one foot ahead of the other, one foot ahead of the other. And at some point, you get up to higher elevation, let me just stop and take a look and survey the land here and what’s going on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Survey land and then you also realized the altitude—
NAOMI: Exactly—
MURIEL WILKINS: Requires a different level of breathing.
NAOMI: Yeah. And I’m not so much of an outdoor person.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let me ask you this, I know you said you ascended one step at a time, one step at a time, but at each of those inflection points or those transition points, what did that look like?
NAOMI: My career pivots have been – mostly it’s just changing companies and have been primarily driven through either boredom as in I’m not developing anymore, I’ve really plateaued. Or figuring out if I want to achieve this next step in life, what would be a better position to help posture me to get to something else? For example, if I look at my resume and I feel like I have a gap in a certain area, maybe I need to see if I could explore a different job, where it could fill in that gap and make me a more marketable person in general. And generally, that aligns with my wanting to learn, develop, and grow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. When you think back to when you first started your career path, did you have a vision of what you wanted to become? Was general counsel, the vision, the goal?
NAOMI: God no. When I first started law school, I thought I was going to be a criminal defense lawyer, and that’s really gone by the wayside.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why? What happened?
NAOMI: Student debt and upon graduating from law school, I thought I would just go into the corporate private practice world for a few years, pay off debt, and then try to pivot. So I just kept going down this path that I’m currently on. And before you know it, you look in the rearview mirror and actually, I’ve actually been out of law school for a very long time and never – which is okay, because I’m still very happy with what I am. To answer your question, now I’m far off from where I anticipated I was going to be when I first started law school.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And is that something that’s still, not necessarily becoming a criminal defense lawyer, but the whole justice piece, is that something that motivated you back then? Is that still a motivation for you now?
NAOMI: No. Not anymore.
MURIEL WILKINS: What motivates you now?
NAOMI: I guess that’s a very broad and open-ended question. Part of my challenge in trying to calm the noise that’s in my head to try to figure out directionally where I think I want to go is because there are many competing interests and not all of them are professionally related. So personal motivation, like I said before, it’s still growth development. But what also motivates me are my kids. I’m a mom of two. I’ve uprooted my family a few different times and it gets harder as my kids get older. My kids are very vocal. Maybe they get that from me and they let me know when they’re not happy. And so last time was a little bit challenging and they were not very happy about that move. And so my kids motivate me, and their happiness is everything to me. So doing something that would be selfish to my own personal career could potentially be in conflict with their happiness. I know the motivator is, I’m a daughter, I’ve got my parents, my elderly parents are still around. And I guess I’m limited on my options because I want to make sure I’m still around for them, in case they need me. I’m a wife. Yeah. So I’ve got my personal motivations and then I’ve got my surrounding motivation, which are all huge factors in my life.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. It’s interesting because you listed them as motivators, and I’m hearing them as guard rails.
NAOMI: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s these guard rails that you have to operate within.
NAOMI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’ll get to it, but I’m still not quite clear what motivates Naomi? What makes Naomi sing? Not what can Naomi do to make sure that everybody else is okay.
NAOMI: To me, I guess if I looked at my life as a pie and everything has a slice. And by the way, I really like pie. So if my life is a pie, work is a slice, kids – when my kids are happy and they’re growing, they’re learning, they’re experiencing life, that makes me really happy. While it is at times a guard rail, it’s also a huge source of happiness for me. What your point about, I hear is guardrails, I think that’s absolutely true. But the flip side of that is also, if my family isn’t happy, then I’m not going to be happy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a moment here. Naomi, is not unlike many high achievers. She’s checked off all the boxes, the good grades, the schools, the job, the family, and now she’s arrived at what she thought was the destination. But along with that, has come a series of what she feels are competing interests. And she wonders if she can really have it all or what that even means. Naomi is feeling dissonance – a tension between different parts of her life. On the one hand, she’s happy with the decisions she’s made because they felt like the right things to do. On the other hand, she’s not happy because she feels they’ve limited her. And this tension is one that many people ignore for a long time. Sometimes their whole lives, until they just can’t anymore. And then the question becomes what to do with it. Or as Naomi puts it, “where do I go from here?”
NAOMI: I’m looking for the magic answer. I’m just looking to quiet the noise that’s in my head, all these competing interests. But then having that laser, which currently is very fragmented, be a little bit more focused, so I feel like I’m okay with the direction that I’m going in. Even if that direction is, I’m not going anywhere for a little bit and just stopping and smelling the roses.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. Right. Because right now, are you in a place where you are looking for something else or are you being offered other things? What is even motivating you right now to be in this place of this question?
NAOMI: I’m always open to new opportunities just to hear, even if it’s just a matter of confirming the fact that I’m happy with where I am. But nothing has really excited me. I feel the same malaise that I feel currently, even with new opportunities. There hasn’t been a single one that’s really gotten me excited, and that’s been different than in prior years, where I’ve been interviewing.
MURIEL WILKINS: How is that different?
NAOMI: For other years, I’ve been excited to try a different job because I’m going to learn something totally different, and I’m going to enter a new field or whatnot. These jobs, I’m not super excited. I’m going through the motions.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so in prior years, your excitement came from the newness of it because it was something new?
NAOMI: New, more challenging, totally different industry. Sometimes the people I’ll be working with, they feel like they’re really smart and I can learn a lot from them or I can work well with them.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so now, because I feel like that was your formula back then for getting excited about something, what would excite you now?
NAOMI: I don’t know. Instead, I hear a lot of naysaying going on in my head. Like the guard rails I were talking about. Starting a new job will require a lot of time away from my family, more travel. I may have to move, uproot my family again. At least now, these are the people I work with are known commodities. I know who they are. I work well with them. I go to a new company. I’ve definitely been at companies before I were in senior management, very challenging to work for. I don’t want to go back to something like that. It’s just all these competing naysayer sounds going on in my head.
MURIEL WILKINS: So here’s the thing. I think that right now you’re operating in reactive mode. In the past, the way that you got your new career positions is you reacted to the opportunity that was in front of you. And it was like somebody put something in front of you and you were, “That looks good.” And imagine it was a meal. It was, “That looks good. That looks delicious. Let me try it. It’s new, never had it.” And then you’ve had a couple of those really, really good meals. And now the next one is being put in front of you. And you’re like, “It’s not that different. Not sure if it’s going to create excitement.” And so really, you’re at this place right now, instead of reacting to the opportunity that in front of you, you’re at a place of having to try to figure out what could it look like? What’s the possibility? If I could create it, what would be the components that would make it exciting, that would make it something that I would want? In order to do that, you’re absolutely right, you’ve got to dampen, as you put it, the naysayers in your mind because quite frankly, we’re just being imaginative. It’s not even real. So why let the naysayers even talk? I want to just be imaginative for a little bit. Imagine that there were no guard rails, or there were no conditions from anyone else. So it was limitless. You could do pretty much anything. I want you to think about what would be the components that would get you in a role that would get you remotely interested in pursuing it.
NAOMI: So top priority to me is it must be a role where I’m learning, developing, and growing. And there has to be a deep enough roadmap for that company where I feel like I’m still going to be challenged going forward in future – five years, seven years down the road, and I’m not going to get bored. It doesn’t necessarily mean that I have everything I do has to be brand new and challenging. It just means that I need to have some of that in my job, in order for me to continue to be interested and engaged. A really nice one on the wishlist would be a company whose product or services or something has something I really believed in. I want to work with people who inspire me, who I feel like are making a difference – whether that be with their employees, with their community, with the world. It doesn’t have to be everything, it could be on a small scale. But somebody who I felt like was really trying to effectuate some change. The impact would be for me, that what drives me to wake up every morning and be excited to do what I do. I know that either I’m going to be challenged with the work that I need to accomplish or challenged by my peers. And that they’re going to stretch my thinking, stretch my abilities, so that I feel like when I started the job, I was at a certain level. And as I progressed through the job, I’m just getting better and better.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And so when those things are not in place, because when they’re in place, you say you’re excited, you’re happy, when those things are not in place, what are you?
NAOMI: I’m where I am now, whereas, I feel like I’m in a rut.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so where did this definition of happiness come from for you?
NAOMI: Probably just from feeling that in the past, in jobs where I felt like those things were aligned and I really loved my job. I think it’s from past experience and knowing what that does feel like and knowing how that makes me feel and how I get excited to work every day.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it’s important to, as you just said, to understand, where that source of joy comes from. What I want you to think about and reflect on is just as you’ve grown as a person and you have advanced in your career, has that recipe for happiness as it relates to work changed at all?
NAOMI: Yes. I think it has. Earlier in my career when I’ve had a lot of great job satisfaction, I maybe had fewer competing interests in my own personal life. So yeah, I agree. How I personally define happiness at work for myself has evolved over years and maybe it’s gotten a little bit more cynical.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So we looked at the wishlist on the work-front. And if you had to prioritize those things around something you believe in, in terms of a product or service, learning to growing and being challenged, and then working with people who inspire you, how would you prioritize those three buckets?
NAOMI: The learning, developing, growing is top. Number two would be a company that whose product services I believe in, in the brand champion. And three would be, working with people who inspire me.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s interesting to me because I feel like the learning, developing, growing, when I asked you about your timeline, what brought you here, and you shared with me your experience going through school and education was number one. And I mean, education is all about learning and growing. And as you went from job to job, it was, which ones are going to help you get to the next level? What gaps do you need to fill? So this has been a very consistent theme for you.
NAOMI: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: If we had to write your theme song, it would be something about learning and growing.
NAOMI: Oh my gosh!
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
NAOMI: Like play to all the kindergartners out there in the world. Such a lame theme song, but okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: But here’s the thing, I’m intrigued by what you said around feeling, I love the word malaise, right, because you can feel it. And so, I don’t know, I’m curious to what extent does that theme song still pump you up and energize you?
NAOMI: None. It’s very quiet right now. Yeah. My theme song isn’t being played anymore.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I do think that you’re at a place of having to make some choices, and people hate when I say this, but choices are the same things as making trade-offs. I think that that’s the place where you need to anchor yourself. What does having it all mean for you? And not what we are, dare I say, conditioned to believe having it all means. What does it mean for Naomi to have it all? And I’ll put that in a more concrete, you’re probably not going to think it’s concrete, but I think it’s more concrete. The question I have for you is how do you define success?
NAOMI: In the grand scheme of things, I think I’ve achieved success. I have a very successful career that a lot of young women that I try to help – they look at me as somebody who they want to learn from me about how I got to where I am. So, by all accounts, I do consider my life a success. I could reflect upon that. What I’m looking for now is just trying to make myself personally a little bit more happy. But, at least from success standpoint, I’m happy overall. I feel like if I quit my job tomorrow, I could look back at my career and what I’ve done and how I’ve also tried to give back, and I’d be happy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So what’s missing for you internally?
NAOMI: In part, I think it’s what we talked about – how do I define happiness professionally, which is a huge part of who I define as myself, and that being unsatisfied. And probably just having always put one foot ahead of the other and not really stopping to think what is it that I really want to do as opposed to, like, this will help catapult me to the next point in my career or this will catapult me to break that glass ceiling of general counsel job, whatnot. It’s not really stopping and say, “is this something that I really want?” As opposed to just focusing on that price of the end.
MURIEL WILKINS: Naomi acknowledged that she’s been so focused on achieving that she’s never stopped to ask herself what she really wants. In a sense, she’s been so busy checking off the external milestones, she’s never checked on the internal ones. At this point of the conversation, I could dive into career strategy mode to help her visualize what her next leadership gig is. That would certainly be more comfortable. But I’d be doing Naomi a disservice because she would have never explored what it means for her to have a sense of happiness inside, no matter what is happening on the outside. And without that, I’m pretty sure she’d ended up right back where she is. So we pick up the conversation where I invite Naomi to explore who she is and what makes her tick beyond her external accomplishments.
MURIEL WILKINS: You said something really interesting there, which is you said that where your professional life is right now, the reason why it’s impacting you is that it is a large part of what creates who you identify as. And so who are you without that?
NAOMI: And I guess that goes back to the other pieces of my pie – that I am, I’m a wife, I’m a mother, I’m a friend, I’m a daughter. I’m all of those things that really dissociate me from my professional persona.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I’m going to push you because it’s very important that leaders understand who they are, not just what they do. And everything that you’ve described for me is what you do, not who
you
are.
NAOMI: I think that is so astute. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And as a result, when what you do feels a certain way, you identify as being that thing. So for example, the job is boring. Therefore, I feel bored. So I’m going to push you beyond the attorney, the mom, the wife, the good daughter, the good friend, the community volunteer. Who are
you
?
NAOMI: I have no idea. I don’t know. I know generally, but I agree with you – I don’t think I’ve ever really thought long and hard about what are the adjectives that I think describe me best. What do I want to stand for? I don’t think I’ve ever really done that because I’m just programmed to keep going, to keep going, to keep going. And like I said, I haven’t really ever stopped to think about myself and what I really want.
MURIEL WILKINS: And who you really are.
NAOMI: Who I really am. I kind of feel lame. I’m mid-forties, and I don’t even know who I am.
MURIEL WILKINS: Come on. You know what? There are so many people who go over yonder and never figure it out.
NAOMI: Can I tell you one story?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
NAOMI: Because I think it’s a very analogous. I remember I was on a job interview, and at the end, the interviewer asked me, “So Naomi, what do you like to do for fun?” And I was completely stumped. I didn’t have an answer.
MURIEL WILKINS: [laughter]
NAOMI: That person asked me that question, which really is a personal, like what brings me joy on my free time? And I couldn’t answer that question.
MURIEL WILKINS: And look, no shame in it. If anything, it’s exciting. It’s an opportunity. You live part of your life doing to get deliverables. And at a certain point, when you feel that type of malaise, it usually is because who you are is not being expressed through your work. And as long as you don’t define what those things are, other people will define it for you, based on what they need from you. I think a big part of this is for you to take this journey to really ask yourself, “what the heck is important to me as a being, as a person?”
NAOMI: Just reflecting upon my own personal career, my professional development, I think in the beginning, in my more junior years, it was okay to not really have a strong personal voice. But as I’ve gotten now to a much higher trajectory, I don’t think I’m done yet. But I’m definitely higher up on the mountain peak that we talked about. That’s either, not maybe it’s not necessary enough, but I’ve done a lot more of that, and I think there’s something else that’s missing that you’ve identified just now, which is, “who am I? And does that align with what I’m doing or what I want to do?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Quite frankly, it’s there, but it’s been piled up on for many, many, many, many years. So now it’s going into this excavation to figure out who it is, which is why I asked you, back when you had this vision about being a criminal defense attorney, what was driving that? Why was that important? When there were no barriers of possibility – before the student loan debt came, before the family came, before all these other responsibilities came, why did that resonate with you?
NAOMI: If you look at my law school courses, it was always criminal defense work, capital punishment defense work, all that type of stuff. And I felt like I was going to do some positive change in the world, help be part of that positive change in the world, to do some good.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why was that important to you to do some good in the way?
NAOMI: Because that gave me – one, I think the world needs it, but two, it made me feel good.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I’m going to just keep asking, why did it make you feel good?
NAOMI: Because I felt like I was helping the world, and that was my motivator in going to law school and taking all these classes. It was giving some purpose behind what I was doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So a sense of purpose around helping others starts creating some clarity around something that resonates with you.
NAOMI: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So what is the difference that you think you can make, Naomi, in helping others – whether it be through work or outside of work?
NAOMI: Well, I think I’m a compassionate person and I care. I care about people.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is the first time I actually heard you use an adjective to describe yourself. You said, I’m just going to repeat it. I don’t know if you heard yourself. You said, “I am compassionate.” Okay. So there you are, check number one in terms of who is Naomi? She’s compassionate. I’m saying it glibly, but a part of that is then asking yourself, “in what ways can I express this compassion that I have for people?” And “is this, wherever I am, a vehicle through which I can express this because it’s a part of who I am?” It’s no different than being an artist. I’m not an artist, but I’m always in awe because they literally have this insatiable appetite to express themselves. Now, we actually all are artists. We just haven’t realized it because we think it’s all about drawing, but it’s more around, what is your vehicle? And if it’s going to be through your profession, great, let’s make sure that, that’s fair. So we need to continue down this list of this, “I am, fill in the blank.” “I am compassionate.” And the way that you can try to figure out what those are is think back to those experiences that did create positivity for you, that resonated with you – where you felt like this is where I’m supposed to be, or it feels like it’s an extension of me. It doesn’t feel like a struggle. In those moments, who were you?
NAOMI: I guess I’m just not used to using adjectives to [describe] myself. I’m used to describing myself with titles.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I could sit here and encourage you, which is an exercise that a lot of people get, “Go ask a bunch of people, who do they think you are.” But I actually think for you, I’d rather you don’t because it’s just going to add to the noise.
NAOMI: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think the real work is for you to figure it out, rather than take what other people think you are, and then try to fit that. The question that I have for you, another way of framing it, besides who you are is, what are the parts of you that have been quieted down, that are now not being fully expressed through your work?
NAOMI: Yes, I agree. And clearly it’s happening because I’m not happy at work. I’ve got that malaise. Nothing really excites me. And so it’s happening, I just haven’t figured out what that is.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And look, if it’s not happening at work, because work can’t be the answer for everything, then it’s very important that it’s, in what other areas of my life can it be supported? I think, Naomi, you’re actually on the right path. I just would suggest that you inverse it – in that the path you’re on right now is you’re grasping and reacting and hoping that the next job, the next opportunity, the next event, the next conversation is going to satiate you, rather than asking yourself, “what satiates me?” And let me go find that. I use much food analogy. It’s like when my son opens the fridge and I’m, “what are you doing?” And he’s like, “Well, I don’t know. I’m just looking for someone to eat.” And I’m, “Well, what do you want to eat?” “I don’t know.” I’m just staring. I’m like, “that fridge can’t stay open for hours and hours and hours.” And what does he eventually end up doing? He just shuts the door, and he doesn’t eat anything.
NAOMI: I wish I was doing that, by the way.
MURIEL WILKINS: I know, me too. I always find something. It’s usually the kids’ chicken nuggets.
NAOMI: Yes, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: The leftover ones.
NAOMI: It’s more like I need to edit what I’m eating. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. But you yet my drift here, right?
NAOMI: I do. That’s a great analogy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Have a sense of what you want, and have that one what it is that you desire. Don’t have it based on what you
think
you should be doing because of what you’ve learned all these years of your life. Have it truly based on this is what I want because it’s a reflection of who I believe I am right now. And I’m saying right now because our sense of who we are changes over time, as it should. We deepen with it. We understand it more. It doesn’t change, we just understand it.
NAOMI: It evolves. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It evolves. And so for you, it’s very important that you don’t put so much pressure on yourself around, “I’ve got to figure it out as this answer forever.” It’s for this point in time.
NAOMI: I totally agree with you. And I probably was looking for, frankly, an easier answer than to actually do some self-reflection, deep self-reflection to figure out who I am because that’s not an exercise I’ve done my entire life and so that’s harder.
MURIEL WILKINS: It is harder. It is harder, I wish I could just say, “it’s easy!” So how do you think you could use your current role to help you articulate “who am I right now?”
NAOMI: I am, as an adjective for myself, in addition to being compassionate, I like to help people. And so I feel like one possibility at my current company would be to design a program or to suggest a program that can help some of our younger women leaders, giving them a voice. I sort of informally do that on the side, but I could think of a way to design something that would not only help the company and help our employees, but also do something that has always innately been with me and would bring me happiness or some fulfillment.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And because I’m going to take the opportunity that I have with you during this coaching session to try to retrain you with some new language that if you did that, that isn’t what brought you happiness, isn’t what would bring you happiness. The program isn’t what would bring you happiness. What would bring you happiness is the feeling that what you’re doing is in sync with who you are.
NAOMI: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so what I’m suggesting to you is try to find as many opportunities where your actions are in sync with who it is you believe you are. That’s it. In reality, what that means is we wait for the big moments to do that – our jobs, whatever, a bunch of stuff, the big self. But in reality, you have that opportunity every single minute. You go to the grocery store – is the way I’m dealing with the cashier aligned with who I am and want to be in this world? This is what we call integration. Okay. When you’re integrated, there’s not a lot of space between the way that you act and what you do and who you are. The colloquial way, as I like to say, is when you’re keeping it real.
NAOMI: I think that’s really astute.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so something’s got to change, either the external or the internal. And guess what? You have spent your whole life changing the external and it’s landed right back in the same spot. So what do you think has to change?
NAOMI: Yeah. The internal, I need to figure out the internal and make it harmonize with what I’m doing in the environment.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. And let the internal drive the external, let the external be a reflection of the internal rather than the internal be a reflection of the external.
NAOMI: Yeah. I’ve never [inaudible].
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? And right now, your internal is a reflection of the external. If the job is good, if the kids are happy, if the husband’s happy, if the parents are healthy, if the house is nice, if the friends are acting right, then I’m happy. And I’m saying, okay. “Now, what does happy Naomi look like?” How does the rest of the world fall in formation with that?
NAOMI: Yeah. Definitely, it resonates with me because I think it explains, in my last few years, why I felt certain ways or been not satisfied or just confused. Not necessarily because I have the answer, but because now I figured out what the problem is, what I need to think through. And you could even see this in how you ask your questions with me. I was not able to answer them with precision. I was dancing around the answers because I’ve never gone deep into, “who am I? What am I? What drives me?” You started this whole interview with what motivates me, and I gave you answers. But it probably, whether all true, it wasn’t really me at my core because I’ve never looked into that. I feel like I’m viewing my situation through a new lens. And that different perspective has caused me to realize there’s different pathways to eventually get myself to a point of greater clarification. And that means I’m moving and not stuck. And I think that’s amazing. I feel like I had a haze over my eyes, and it’s starting to get clearer.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are your key takeaways and what are you going to do [after] leaving this session?
NAOMI: I need to stop and really self-reflect, which is something I’ve not done ever – whether it be what motivates me or what makes me happy, brings me joy. But also who I am defines me, and figure out what those things are. And through that, does it mesh with what I’m doing – whether that be professionally, personally, whatever? And see in those areas, where I feel like there is incongruity, how can I either pivot what I’m doing, so that it can have some harmony with who I am. Or can I change what’s in my control to be able to have better harmony? Because I think through that, I’m going to, once again, find some excitement. I’m going to be motivated again. I’m just going to feel more at peace. It’s not finished yet, but at least I have a way of proceeding so that I can get some clarity and change some things. At the end of the day, it may not mean necessarily changing jobs. It may not mean doing things differently. But I just think, even at its core function, you’ve changed my mindset about how I view this. I think you’ve given me greater perspective and understanding. And I think that has caused that haze in my vision to kind of get cleared up.
MURIEL WILKINS: So many times coaching clients want the answer, the to-do action item that will magically solve their problem. And while I love nice actionable items at the end of the coaching session, sometimes the real work is not so tangible. It’s about the stuff we can’t see and touch. It’s about mindset. And so, Naomi, leaves with homework that is way more about internal reflection than an action plan. But what is clear is that once she does the internal work, the actions will come. It’s a reminder to us all that leadership is as much about who we are, as it is about what we do.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time:
DENISE: And so I’m navigating through the growing pains and the change at the same time. I don’t want to come off defensive to my peers, you know, I don’t want to be – and I always joke about this at the office – I’m like I feel like I’m that mouse on “Who moved my cheese?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners, for sharing their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter, @MurielMWilkins, or on Instagram, @coachmurielwilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 3: Bridging the Gap Between Me & My Team
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest, we’ll call him “Chris” for the sake of confidentiality, is a senior executive at his company who, in his words, is committed to developing his staff to reach their full potential, but he’s been feeling the strain of fulfilling that goal as he’s increasingly leading teams with people two decades his junior.
CHRIS: The generational gap is becoming slightly bigger, so suddenly, they don’t laugh at your jokes, they think you’re weird, you’re the old guy. To still have that relationship and being able to be a part of the development and the lives of the young guys, so it’s just to understand how to do this, how do you get that right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Chris is a white South African leading a team comprised, primarily, of people of color.
CHRIS: I know that I have white privilege, there’s no doubt about that. I’m a native Afrikaans-speaking guy, so I’m everything that is what was wrong in our country and that adds a lot of complexity in terms of how to engage and how to get the best out of your team.
MURIEL WILKINS: He’s struggling with how to engage, motivate, and level up a team that is so different from him. And this is the question he came with, how do I bridge the gap between me and my team? We start the coaching conversation by clarifying his why, why was it so important to Chris that he bridge this gap?
CHRIS: If they are better at looking after the details and then dealing with the immediate operational issues that they’ll face, that gives me more capacity and ability to focus on more the strategic and the longer-term stuff. Ultimately, we all want to fulfill our own potential and I know that in our company, all our senior guys are actually feeling the strain of becoming too involved in detail. So we want to break that cycle, and how do we empower them so that we create the capacity so that we can focus on the longer-term strategic stuff that’s going to make a difference to all of us?
MURIEL WILKINS: You mentioned that in your career, you were recognized for your leadership qualities and that’s part of what’s been your success in terms of being able to ramp up pretty quickly into management roles. So what are those leadership qualities that were recognized in you?
CHRIS: I’m definitely a fan of the servant leader approach. So for me, I realized that there’s so much more that a team can do than when one person can do on its own. So if I can get our team, to empower them and to develop them, I think that will just make us bigger, the sum of the parts is less than the sum of the total equation, if I have that maths equation correct here.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. It always confuses me too.
CHRIS: I think having the ability to play this from a strategic to a detail level also helps in that everybody around you would do the strategic thinking and the longer-term goal and what we’re busy with. And at the same time, you’re also in the trenches helping them to fight and win that war on that forefront.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you talk about servant leadership, which is such a broad theme, how do you apply that servant leadership on a day-to-day basis?
CHRIS: For me, one of the key things of a servant leader is somebody who doesn’t necessarily take the credit, you join the success that people achieve and what we’ve achieved and understanding a bit what you contributed to that. So having said that, there are times when I feel somebody else is taking some credit for work that I’ve done, but it’s not something that I’m striving for. Even from as long as I can remember, that was just my makeup, so maybe my parents, my upbringing, I don’t know how it is. But it’s always just been with me and it had some conflict in me, there were times where I felt maybe somebody else is taking more recognition or getting what I needed, but I did take comfort in seeing the guys, how they develop. And especially late in their careers to meet up with them and see what they’ve become and know that, yes, I was part of that, it’s something that I think is maybe more everlasting than that moment of glory of recognition.
MURIEL WILKINS: Talk to me a little bit about your team, all right, I want to get to see them through your eyes a little bit more. So what’s going on with them?
CHRIS: We have a range of experience there, literally people who’s 21, 22, 23. So these guys haven’t seen necessarily the best and the worst of different industries, the only thing that they see is what’s around them. So for me, I think the transition and the challenge is that this team is inexperienced a little bit on the technical side because they’re learning still, but also in terms of the exposure from a business side, and that’s a challenge. My goal or what I would like is to see, how do we get these guys to step up to fulfill this new role and to reach their full potential? But at the same time, the challenges is that, hopefully I’m not old, but I’m in my forties, some of these guys are in their twenties, so a different generation, different ways of thinking, analyzing and looking at problems. Our company did quite well in terms of its diversification and we have quite a number of different demographics across the board, so to make sure that I relate to them, they relate me and we reached that goal of unleashing their potential.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. I want to unpack it a little bit because there’s a lot there. First, let’s talk about the team being inexperienced, if you will, or feeling like they’re inexperienced. So how does that manifest itself?
CHRIS: Typically where I see it quite often is, in our engagement internally and with our clients where we plan what we are doing, they will not necessarily push back. I think our role is to train and to guide and to also say, but have you considered the other options? So for me, that’s our benefit, the inexperience there, just that critical thinking and ability to make sure that we’re doing the right thing and not only what’s being asked. I think that school has changed to tick boxes, so for me it feels that the younger generation and the way they came through the schooling and the training and everything, maybe forgot about that story, they’re just ticking boxes. There’s a plan, we did consider risks, there’s a risk plan, but we didn’t consider all the risks. There’s a communication plan, but we missed out seven people, but we had the plan.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so the impact of them only having this tick the box type of approach, what ends up being the impact on the work?
CHRIS: If we just tick the boxes, but we are not doing the right things as we never get to those long-term enhancements and acceleration and stuff there because we’re always busy fighting the operational stuff. It’s like we are having this bicycle, but we are jogging next to it, but we never stop to get onto the cycle because we have to run the old time, you cannot afford to stop. And by making these wrong decisions just forces us to run quicker the whole time. So it’s this process and cycle repeats itself, we want to do the right things, but we do it wrongly and then it just creates pleasure on us to do it over again, it just takes more effort.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a quick pause here. Chris has clarity on what he’s trying to accomplish, to build capacity on his team so they can think more critically and make decisions more independently, leaving him to focus more on the strategic aspects of leadership rather than just fighting fires. And Chris aptly recognizes that it’s on him to figure out how best to engage the team in spite of the generational difference, while also not turning a blind eye to the current racial context in South Africa. He thought it was important to share how race impacts his ability to develop his team.
CHRIS: As you may be aware, South Africa is a very diverse country, we also have our legacy of apartheid and blacks were not afforded to be part of the economy and voting all of that. So that’s 25 years ago, it changed, but it hasn’t changed really, I’m white, I still experience white privilege even though I was still at school when these things were changed, but I still have white privilege, there’s no doubt about that. Our team, the majority is black, which is great from a empowerment and a transformation and perspective there, so that definitely is very positive. It is a very dangerous thing for a white man, Afrikaans man to express an opinion and to take somebody on, is it coming from a position that you think is superior? Is it coming from a position that you think that you still want to maintain that white privilege and all of that there as well? And that just makes it slightly more complicated to keep people accountable and responsible. It is a real factor that I’m aware of, I’m not even sure whether our team is aware of it, but being a 40-year-old white Afrikaans male, it is dealing with young team there, it adds complexity.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that this is something that many people can relate to, particularly in today’s time. And it’s as you said, having an awareness around it, but what’s most critical is how you use that awareness. Having awareness for the sake of awareness doesn’t really do anything, and how do you actually use it to accomplish the goals that you want, not just for your team, but also how does that align with your whole philosophy around leadership, which is around being a servant leader?
You mentioned that while you have a high level of awareness around your white privilege and how one needs to be sensitive given the complexity, you haven’t necessarily experienced anything where it’s had a detrimental aspect.
CHRIS: Not personally, I had instances in the team where there were accusations of racism, I think there was racism and we dealt with that then also. So I haven’t experienced it personally, but I think it’s very real.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then from the age perspective, because that’s the other piece of the complexity that you mentioned, how does that bear out? What does that look like? Where do you feel the differences?
CHRIS: That’s a good question. Maybe it’s more in my mind that I’m sensitive that I’m getting older and that these guys are maybe getting younger or that’s the way it feels to me. Again, maybe I’m superimposing my daughters just how they think and experience life maybe onto this team as well, sometimes it doesn’t make sense to me. And I don’t want to share necessary to them and say, this is how we’ve done it, because I know it’s a different world and I know it’s a different place and there are just some things that maybe I don’t understand. I don’t understand the social media and the need for all of that, for me, it’s not really that big a thing, but I know for them it’s crazy how many followers they want and what’s important to them, and that’s where it manifests a bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. And look, at the end of the day it’s not for you to understand just for the sake of understanding, it really goes back to the type of leader that you said you want to be, which is a servant leader. Well, how can you serve anyone if you don’t understand them, if you don’t really see the world through their eyes? Part of where we want to go to that I’m going to encourage you to do is really look behind what’s the purpose behind why you want to understand them and hence why you feel the tension. The tension is not necessarily from a place of, because you want to be part of or relevant to this group.
CHRIS: Please not.
MURIEL WILKINS: But at the same time, you have this desire to help them meet their potential because that’s a huge part of who you are and your purpose and why you do the workday in, day out. And so I think you’re feeling this tension because there’s something in you that’s like saying, I don’t know necessarily how to motivate them, I don’t necessarily know how to move them because they’re different than me. And so that’s on the age aspect. And then on the racial aspect, correct me if I’m wrong, I’m just going to throw this out there, but there might be a part of you that feels like, I want to be able to help them move the needle, but yet I feel held back because I can’t be at or I feel “I can’t be as direct” as I think I need to be able to move them forward. And so when you’re in those situations where you don’t understand why one of your team members did the way they did, whether it’d be how they communicated or how they went about something, what do you do at that moment? What have you done?
CHRIS: And what I’m trying to do is that to try and explain to them why I think it’s important. So I would say you are communicating, A, I think we need to emphasize, B, also because of these reasons, but not to dismiss A and say A is invalid, but to try and do both of them. Or prompt them to explain and just provide more context or reasoning why I think A is important and not B, so we engage with that. It does happen sometimes just by nature of my role, and what I mean is that I do overrule them and say, cool, this is what we have to do. But most cases, we find a way where we get both points across, so compromise type of thing where we get both of them across. And then what I’m hoping for is, next time when we are facing the situation is that you would already consider then the previous incident and then apply some of those learnings into that as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. And how does that work out?
CHRIS: Varied levels of success, Muriel. So sometimes it works, sometimes I think we’re down this road again. One of the things that worries me a bit is, again, these guys are good at ticking the boxes, but if you’re just two steps away from them, then they start forgetting ticking boxes or checking that there as well. So I’m not sure whether it really sits with them and resonates with them there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Well, one of the things-
CHRIS: And then that’s frustrating a bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: The frustrating part is what?
CHRIS: It’s remind them and say, remember we did this in that situation, it worked out well, let’s do that again. It becomes part of their inner fiber or that penny drop.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. So there’s a couple of things I want to pull back for a little bit. There’s the developmentally where your team members are just based on experience, the added layer then is just generationally, demographically being in a different reality than what you were brought up in, your career path. And those two merge because then the question becomes, how do I move them along this development path in a way that’s really going to resonate with them? I’m going to ask based on that question before we move into what are some of the things that you could try. Can you think about specific efforts that you’ve tried in trying to deal with this challenge that you have, and what’s worked, what hasn’t worked?
CHRIS: Actually, one would’ve maybe a couple of off day sessions where we can talk about this related to it and then start articulating those strategies and then apply that. It hasn’t been that formal there, but I’ve had quite a number of discussions, one-on-ones and smaller teams with guys where we try and say, this is what we need and this is what we need to drive. And also this is what we need to be emphasizing in our teams, is to take this person is to say, we know that this person is young and we know that he’s struggling a bit with us, so how do we support, how do we enable them, and how do we set them up to achieve or to do that?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. So it sounds like you have introduced a lot of concepts to them and approaches that if they applied would set them up for success?
CHRIS: From my perspective [inaudible 00:17:06].
MURIEL WILKINS: From your perspective, exactly. So I’m having this vision of you teaching and coaching and my question to you is, what have they shared around what they see as success for them and what it means to be a successful, effective high impact team player on your team?
CHRIS: That’s a good question. So I had these discussions one-on-one and with some of the, maybe let’s call it four or five guys at the time, but we never had it as a big group, as a collective and as a team and to get that formal buy-in and understanding of it, we haven’t done that. It’s a realization that it actually would’ve taken, I don’t know, four half-day sessions to give the guys the context to get the buy-in and then to co-create, so one should be able to do that. But if I said yeah, and I’m thinking I’m going to take four half-days out of our entire team, I’m going to get so many push back from our team themselves.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. So the logistics can always get in the way. I was sharing with somebody yesterday, whenever you are embarking on something worthwhile and something that might be a bit difficult, you will always face inconveniences. And so the inconveniences can’t be the things that stop you, it’s working around them. Chris realizes that in order to fully engage the team, he can’t just tell them what success looks like. Instead, he needs to make them part of the process by asking what they see as the current state of the team, how they define the desired future state of the team, and how they each contribute as a high-impact team player to the group’s ultimate success. And by engaging his team in creating and defining expectations, that is where the empowerment he desires for them actually starts. Let’s jump back into the conversation as Chris starts to think through how to pragmatically approach this with his team.
CHRIS: I always try and balance the need of the individual, our company, and then our client. And sometimes there are certain trade-offs know, so it’s not always based for the client, but it is based for our company or for the individual or it’s based for the client but not necessarily for the individual. So if you were to define then what this ideal state in this future is going to be, do you define it then from those three perspectives or is there one common goal and then everything is aligned to that? Because for me, and I think this is also where obviously the guys are young, they’re ambitious and they want increases in salary and they want an increase in responsibility, but the roles doesn’t allow for that necessarily. When you have that session with the team as a collective to define from what perspective do you do it? Or do you do it from all three?
MURIEL WILKINS: They may not overlap 100 percent, but there should be, if you can imagine, three circles that are overlapping, a Venn diagram if you will, there should be some overlap and some coloration, some shading between all three. What does it require from us at a team level and what does it require from us at an individual level in laying that out? Because that then sets the expectations, and only if you have the expectations can you then hold people accountable to it or can they hold themselves accountable to it. Having that driving framework is very important, and I think even more importantly for you given again the differences generationally, demographically of the makeup of your team, the composition of your team, I think it’s very important that they have a voice in creating what that framework looks like.
CHRIS: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: If indeed what you want is for them to feel ownership of it.
CHRIS: Well, that’s going to guarantee implementation and success because they’re going to make solutions to what they’ve faced.
MURIEL WILKINS: It may not guarantee it, but, it at the very least, will make you pause to say, I was a part of creating this, maybe I should be doing what I said.
CHRIS: They’re going to make it look it, it’s part of their vision and part of their plan.
MURIEL WILKINS: And also just for you at an individual level with what’s in your control, you can’t make them do anything, you can lead them to it as best you can, but you can’t make them do anything. And so how do you lead them to it? You involve them and engage them, which by the way, generationally is what this younger generation is looking for. You and I, we’re of a similar generation, come from much more of a hierarchical generation where we were told what to do, and this generation wants a sense of purpose, they want to be part of the solution-
CHRIS: And a sense of belonging.
MURIEL WILKINS: And a sense of belonging. And so as the leader, it’s understanding that, that is part of their DNA. And so how do you tap into that to inspire them? What is important to the people on your team? And I don’t know, have you asked that question?
CHRIS: Yeah, we have. Obviously, these guys want to develop their own capabilities, assume more responsibilities, work on bigger problems, so we add those discussions and that’s what we are trying to do, is to get them to get to that point as quick as possible. But also for them to understand that it’s not a six-month exercise, it’s going to take some while, especially if it’s your first job, you need to go through, do the odd jobs before you get to that next level. I don’t think we’re good enough at looking after maybe some of the softer skills and the critical thinking, that aspect, I don’t think we invest enough in our team there.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s two sides to it, there’s the technical aspect and there’s the behavioral aspect. And the behavioral aspect as we talk about the soft skills, the saying goes, the soft skills are often the hardest skills because they’re not as tangible, and they are often life skills that come with a sense of maturity. And so a big part of being a leader is, how do you help the people on your team not just adapt the technical skills that are going to make them good doers? How do you also help them build the behavioral attributes and the soft skills that are also going to help them be good leaders? And leaders is not hierarchical here, because what I hear you saying when you’re saying, I want people on my team to be able to own the work, to think critically, to think long-term, to be able to empower themselves to make decisions, well, those are our leadership skills. When they’re younger in their career, you can’t expect them to operate at a certain level of leadership without, A, setting those expectations and then, B, giving them the support to get there. And I think the tension you are feeling is that it’s falling on you. And so one of the things, and this is more of an organizational question, Chris, in terms of what is your organization ready to do to not only build these young professionals technically, but also to build them from a leadership standpoint so that they can do things like critical or at least be given the opportunity to do things like critical thinking, decision-making, et cetera?
CHRIS: I think that’s one of the challenges. And I’m on the executive leadership of the organization, a lot of our leadership team there has grown their experience and their track record is, I struggled, then I grew and then I did this. Maybe not always appreciating some external inputs or training or coaching that they may have received, they just think, I’ve done this, I’ve been there, these guys can also do it.
MURIEL WILKINS: But listen, but what you’re sharing here is also a generational divide. You do a disservice to the rest of the organization wherein you want to lead them from your reality, from what you experienced. Meaning, because I went through this, this is what you need to go through. And so your biggest job as a leader is to figure out what is their reality, not just so you can understand it, but so that you can then determine what’s the best way to level them up, not just in terms of what they need to do, but the support they need. Chris recognizes that above and beyond their technical skills, he really wants his team to demonstrate leadership abilities, but they haven’t been given the training to do so. It becomes clear to him that until there’s an organizational effort to develop early career staff in the “softer skills,” it will always feel like an uphill battle. So he now has to parallel path by, one, influencing the executive management team to invest in this type of staff development, and two, taking interim steps with his team to move the needle on their capabilities. As he thinks about the actions he can take with his team, I ask him to think about it in terms of the next 12 months, in a year, what does he want his team to be?
CHRIS: Some of them I would like to be leaders in other teams, which means that they would’ve grown and developed. I would like to have that culture or structure that more juniors actually arise up so that they become the seniors so that the seniors can become the leaders in other teams. We manage to create a structure that supports that, then that’s great.
MURIEL WILKINS: You set that overarching context and framing so that they understand why, why are we doing this, okay?
CHRIS: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So there’s the why and then underlying it, well, what does that look like over the next year? I would ask you, and you might not have the answer today, but to think about what is the theme behind what you want the team to accomplish, what you want the team to go through in the next year? Name it, and I think when you name something, it can be very helpful in getting people to rally around it.
CHRIS: But maybe one way of getting the team is for them to come up with a theme, to try and coin it also to get that ownership in there. So maybe they can decide that.
MURIEL WILKINS: You also set up pretty clearly on the outset that … and by the way, what we’ve been talking about is applicable to any leader who wants to engage and move things forward. What you articulated earlier on in our conversation is this additional layer of complexity of age differential and then racial differential. And I want to talk a little bit about those because I do think that those two variables does add a level of complexity. The question really is more about how do you respond to those complexities rather than trying to change them. In the way that you’ve handled these differences, if you will, to what extent do you feel like you’ve trusted yourself in those situations?
CHRIS: Again, there may be stuff that I’m blind to that I don’t see, so I would say I’m trusting myself, but I may be missing, I may be having some blind spots there.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I think the level of awareness that you have just in terms of you stating that you may have some blind spots, puts you in a position where you can then say, I may have blind spots in that moment, so what do I do? If you think you might have blind spots, it’s just like when you’re driving, if you think you have a blind spot, what do you do?
CHRIS: You actually look and focus to see what is there or not. Now that you mentioned, maybe that’s what happened by actually being diligent in terms of understanding all the issues, getting all the facts that you’re trying to reduce that blind spot.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. You engage, you don’t ignore the blind spot, you don’t move into the lane without looking. You don’t make believe the blind spot doesn’t exist, that there’s no such thing as a blind spot. You check, you make sure you look at the situation more so than just what’s in front of you and then you take action. And so I’m using that to say part of what you have, and I think it’s what has become part of your own leadership DNA, is a sense of understanding that the context is larger than your own reality. That is a strength, and you need to leverage that strength, not only in the work that we just talked about with your team, but also in dealing with the complexities of age and racial differences, that is a strength. The fact that you recognize that, A, there are these differences, B, that they might see the world differently than you do, so you have that awareness, now how do you act on it? How do you respond with it? What is it that you want to create? What kind of environment and space do you want to create for these individuals on your team? Regardless of what their background is, regardless of their racial profile, regardless of their age, how do you want them to feel as a result of being in your leadership?
CHRIS: I would like, when they think of me and my time with them and the role that I play, is that they would’ve learned from me, then I would’ve encouraged them to reach their full potential and that I offered guidance. I think the opportunities to really excel and then also to correct them, and if I say correct them, not discipline or anything, but to say, this is something that we could have done differently or that we could have approached differently, is to have that feedback as well. I’m not only a cheerleader, you need also to assist and have some tough discussions with them also where you may actually sometimes… and also coming from somebody who wants the best for them, it is not there to be a dictator or a savior or a autocrat or anything, I would like them, when they’re old, they would remember me that I made a difference in their life positively.
MURIEL WILKINS: That you made a difference in their life, and that’s huge. So I want you to hold onto that because I think rather than operate from this lens of, I need to be sensitive, which has its place, I’m not dismissing that whatsoever, there’s an and. I want to add another lens, which is, how do I operate from a place of people feeling like when they are in my presence, when they are experiencing my leadership, they feel as though they are progressing, they feel like there is a difference being made in their life. Because that understanding of how do you want to make them feel then should drive how you behave and how you act. And so much of what you’re talking about around dealing with age differences, racial differences is more about the delivery and the how rather than nine times out of 10, the intent. Yes, you want to be in service of your team members and you want to engage them and you want to provide them with the direction and the feedback or whatever they need in order for them to be successful, the business to be successful, your clients to be successful. And so it’s just making sure that this aspect of being sensitive is channeled in the right direction.
CHRIS: Muriel, what resonated with me is where you said that, that shouldn’t hold me back from doing and wanting the best and believing the best and trying to get it out, it shouldn’t be inhibiting. So that definitely, I resonated.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. I think about the how is what’s more critical when you’re dealing with these complexities, and so what it requires … this brings us back to the beginning of our conversation. Look, I think at the core of it, you shared pretty strongly that a motivating factor for you is being a servant leader who makes a difference in others’ lives. And so when you look at this next generation of leadership and you have this desire to make a difference, the way to get there, the way to serve them is to engage in their reality and then help lead them to whatever future they desire because they’re the ones who are going to have to sit in it, they’re the ones who are going to have to live in it. It’s very clear to me that you do that at an individual level in terms of servant leadership. And I think your challenge now, and I think you’re ready for it, is raising that up, is how do you apply servant leadership on a bigger platform with your team, with your organization, with your clients. So it’s basically raising up what you’re able to do, which you’ve demonstrated at an individual level and making the scope and the scale larger. I think it’s really this mental shift of, I can apply the same construct on a bigger playing field, and therefore-
CHRIS: I think you’re right, sorry that I interrupt you.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, it’s okay.
CHRIS: I think that my challenge is now to replicate this, not only across my team, but this division and the company. And that’s a good challenge for me, I’m still too young not to accept challenges or anything, so I think that’s a good challenge to do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. And I think that’s where it’ll come back to actually really satisfying your desire to make a difference. Because not only will you be making a difference one person at a time, you’ll be making a difference at a broader scale.
CHRIS: No, you’re right, so definitely. I must say, I can’t remember when last I thought about these things, so it really helps to reflect and to talk about it and to articulate it. I think one gives structure and some power to do this by spending enough time on this, so thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s look at it this way, today was some time where you took the moment to actually get on the bike, now you actually have to start pedaling up the mountain on that bike.
CHRIS: Some of the things really are clearer, and just by spinning that time, it forces you to just stand back a bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we started the coaching session, Chris was stuck, he felt like the generational and racial differences between him and his team were getting in his way. But by the end of the session, he realized those gaps, they were exactly the reason he needed to proactively engage in discussions to figure out how to best support them because ultimately he realized that they all want the same thing, to be successful. And he’d have a better chance of accomplishing this goal by seeking to understand and make them part of the solution, whether it’d be in the consistent act of giving feedback or including them in defining team expectations or providing them with training beyond the technical skills. And Chris uncovered that while he has work to do with his team, before him lies an opportunity to impact how the overall company develops and cultivates the next generation of leaders, a cause he is energized and motivated to take on as it is so clearly aligned with his purpose as a leader to make a difference in people’s lives. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders.
Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I’m in this weird position of like, this is a lot of work, I don’t think I want it that bad, and I end up just frustrated with the circle of insanity that I’m constantly caught in to the point now where I’m just thinking, you know what, maybe this just isn’t for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, music composer, Brian Campbell and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show, apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Manage Other Managers?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
— part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that a bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them — so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Today’s guest, who we’ll call “Andrew” to maintain his confidentiality, has built his career in the tech world. After business school, he switched into consulting, but realized he really wanted to be back in tech. He worked at a startup for some time and now holds a leadership position at a more established tech firm.
ANDREW: I’ve never had formal training on managing managers. I understand that I’m going to have to be much more of a coach and get the work done through them. But as someone who’s always been very hands on and was rewarded in my career for being hands on and jumping into problems – you know, the analogy of parachuting out of a plane in a bad situation — that was always what I was rewarded for. And so now I have to take a step back and say, “okay, it cannot be me. I won’t have the time for that.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So “Andrew” has been a manager before and he succeeded because of a certain skillset. But now he’s going up a level and realizes there are different skills he needs to be a manager of managers.
ANDREW: There is a mindset shift that I need to go through and being really comfortable in this new role that I’m going to be put in, I think there’s certainly strategies on how to work with senior managers and how to unlock them and make sure they’re successful. But it’s resisting all of the old habits.
MURIEL WILKINS: In the past “Andrew” has proven himself valuable in transformational projects, but the scope and scale of his role has changed. He now has three managers reporting to him. He also has to manage his own time and priorities, and he has to manage up. We start the conversation, as I ask him about some of the main challenges he’s faced since he’s taken on the role.
ANDREW: So the couple of themes here, one is around just stakeholder and project management at a very large scale. Number two would be around, in cases where I don’t know what I don’t know, which is still a lot at such a large company, just being more transparent or open been about that. And then if there’s a third one, I would say it’s probably around driving more clarity. It’s related to project management and stakeholder management, but really driving clarity for the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So now you’re in the state of you are transitioning into leading a new team. So as you think about onboarding into this new role, what is keeping you up at night now? What are the things that you feel challenged by? And we can then segue that into, how do we make this coaching conversation most impactful for you?
ANDREW: So this is where I have to get into a bit about where the managers are. So I have one manager who is brand new to managing, and this individual struggles with letting go of work because they’re so good at the technical work. I will need someone like that, but I worry about bandwidth and overcommitting and all of those things and prioritization, etc. The other manager is one of the rising stars — very good, has been a people leader for a while now. I think it’s more about helping him create clarity on the team because he can jump in and save every situation, but I’d rather not have every situation be a fire drill, if that makes sense. I’d rather it be like, “hey, three steps ahead we see something on the horizon, and let’s get ahead of it.” That’s where I also struggle. So how do I help this individual to really get better at that? And then there’ll be a third manager just for context, who I’m hiring for now and will be a brand new person to the team. And all the while, the other thing that keeps me up frankly is I need to know what everyone’s strengths are and watch out areas. How do I do that quickly? I feel like I can learn fast when it comes to content, but when it comes to — this is more relationship driven, seeing people in action. And it’s harder in this environment where we’re still remote too. I cannot be in every one of those meetings to see how they react to things.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re walking this parallel path of wanting to develop yourself, but then you’re also walking this parallel path of having to develop others and coach others up, so that they can be effective managers. What I love about what you’re saying, Andrew, is you’ve articulated one of the biggest tensions of being a manager of managers. And realizing also that if you don’t develop yourself, you can create somewhat of a clog in the pipeline. It’s very hard to optimize other people’s management effectiveness if you haven’t really optimized your own. And so I think we have two forks in the road that we can go down. And it’s not that we won’t look at both, but which one we want to go to first. One is your path, what are the things you need to do in optimizing your management? And then the other is, how do you address the individuals? Okay. And if you know me well enough, take a guess who we’ll start with? Them or you?
ANDREW: We’re going to start with putting my oxygen mask on first.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. Exactly. [laughteer]
MURIEL WILKINS: “Andrew” has a lot going on as he’s transitioning into this new role. He’s been deliberate about his career in the past and wants to be proactive in doing the right things early on to help develop the managers on his team. So to help structure his thinking, I ask him how he defines success in this role, particularly as manager of managers?
ANDREW: Number one, my general philosophy is while I have the privilege of managing these people’s careers — their careers are in my hands — I want them to develop and grow as leaders. Whether that measurable output is, let’s say promotions over time or at least high performance. I’d love to take this opportunity, because this is new for me too, to really prove to myself that I can develop leaders. I can develop other leaders, give them my playbook. That’s number one. Number two is we have some pretty big objectives to deliver on. We’re going to have to be very diligent in laying out expectations, driving to clarity on everything. Otherwise any one thing can consume everybody’s time.
MURIEL WILKINS: So success for you means developing and growing the managers that you manage. And then secondly, that you drive clarity so that you can drive to the results that are being expected?
ANDREW: Yes. And maybe like a 1B to the first one is just, as I’m developing these leaders — especially for the individual who has less management experience — helping that individual develop their people.
MURIEL WILKINS: And, look, I think that what you’ve articulated, in terms of success, is the role that you play. Who else can drive to clarity, but you? It’s almost impossible for them to be clear around what they need to do, if they’re not getting some framework of clarity. Okay. With that in mind, let’s talk about the aspect of driving to clarity. What does that mean to you?
ANDREW: My definition for this is, within large companies, there are often just many groups involved — many functions, many teams, many people. And a lot of times it’s very easy for someone to not know who has the ball on something and to catch things when they’re too late, causing a lot of unnecessary fire drills for a lot of people. So driving to clarity means everybody understands their roles and their responsibilities. Everybody understands their swim lanes. Everybody understands the escalation path that’s needed. And it’s coordination at the end of the day.
MURIEL WILKINS: To what extent is there a clarity around what the destination is?
ANDREW: Ah. So low clarity today. I think there’s some general agreement on, “we need to complete this project,” and I think that’s fairly clear. But I think maybe something missing from that is clarity around, “where are we ultimately driving towards?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. I don’t know. I’m saying yes, but I actually don’t know. That’s what you need to figure out because I think that what you articulated in terms of where there’s lack of clarity is a more symptomatic of probably lack of clarity at a broader level. It’s like saying, “well, it’s unclear, who’s driving, and it’s unclear which car we’re going in. And it’s unclear which road we’re going down. And it’s unclear how much gas we’re going to need. And it’s unclear what we should do if we run into traffic.” And then somebody is like, “but wait, hold up — but where are we going?” “Uh, like, we don’t know!” Well, maybe we should figure that out first and then we’d be able to figure out, “oh, okay, well, if we’re going somewhere, if we’re going X, then maybe you should drive, or the other person should drive, or, oh, well, no, we don’t really need to get gas.” In your role as a manager of managers, only you can really set that bigger picture clarity. And it does start with the exact question that you articulated, which is “what outcomes are we driving to? What’s the destination? How will we know that we have been successful at it?”
ANDREW: That makes sense to me. And would you say, if everyone’s, for lack of better word, vision of where we’re going right now, is anchored or oriented around the project — is that a symptom that there’s probably not as much clarity on what the true outcome we’re driving towards is. Because that’s what I’m seeing?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. The project is the vehicle. The project is the car. I’m asking, what’s the destination that the car will get you to. So the project in and of itself is important. It’s what will get you to whatever it is you’re are trying to get to. So I do think if everyone is focused on the project, my sense is that it can lead to very tactical conversations, decisions, deliberations without line of sight to, “well, where is this getting us to?” The project for the project’s sake is nothing. Okay. It’s what the project is supposed to create, in terms of value, or again, what it’s leading to. That’s the real importance, and that’s going to drive everything else. And maybe a place to start is, I don’t know, if you were to go and ask your counterparts and all the other people who are working on this project, “how do you define success for this project? Or what outcomes are we driving to? What’s our destination?” What would be their answer? And would it be the same answer? So I think that’s the difference between managing a project, and then to use your word, quite frankly, which is even greater, driving vision. What is the vision of what we’re doing? So what role do you see you play?
ANDREW: Well, what I liked about what you just said, what I was thinking the entire time, is my strong hypothesis is people have a very different vision today. And I have not asked and because I haven’t asked, I don’t know. I think this is my opportunity while I still have the, I’m in transition mode card to play. Nine months down the line, people are going to be expecting that I not only am leading the vision, but it’s clear to everyone. I think now is the time that I need to be investing in figuring that out. The question I would ask myself at that point is: “if there is not alignment, then how do we get alignment?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So your role is to set that vision — set that vision and the direction and then drive clarity to how do we get there? You don’t do it in a vacuum though. And so when you think about — what does our team represent? How do you define their reason for existence?
ANDREW: Right now, it’s we need to become more efficient. We need to basically scale processes within the company. If I were to go a step further, and I haven’t done the full thinking on this, but if I go one step further, it’s really at the size of company we are now, we should be world class.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Nothing in what you just said, said, we need to manage projects. I’m not trying to belittle that stuff, but that’s just the grocery list. I don’t know about you, but if I go grocery shopping and I just have a list, but I have no idea what my vision for what I want to make — then I buy everything in the store or I buy all the wrong things in the store. I go straight down the snack aisle instead of the healthy foods. But when I have a vision of, “oh, I want to provide healthy eating for the next week,” then there’s a vision and now I can look and say, “okay, what’s on the list?” What you’re starting to articulate is this overarching vision that is tied to your company. What is the value that is needed at this company, given where it is today? How do you all fit into that? What’s your role? And then you can get to the how? So how we do it is through process improvement or driving to efficiencies. That’s the how, okay. But we got to figure out the what first. The nuance here is, as you have a bigger team with three managers, there has to be this umbrella – “what?” — across the three. And then their job is to then figure out the what for their team. But it has to fit under that umbrella.
ANDREW: Hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a step back here. At the core of Andrew’s issues is his uncertainty of what he should be doing differently now. And what becomes clear to him is that a huge part of how he’ll add value is by helping define the vision and clarity of priorities for his managers, which is different than what has led to much of his success in the past. Now he’s going to have to drive projects and deliverables through others, but he’ll only be able to do it well if he can provide overarching context and direction. Many times individuals new in their role default to what they did in their old role because they haven’t really defined how they add value in their new position. They think it’s just going to magically appear. It’s quite the opposite. Andrew has to be intentional about what he’s going to take on, while being just as disciplined in choosing what he needs to let go of.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to ask you: in your role, in having to develop and grow them as leaders — what do you think you need to let go of? And what do you think you need to pick up?
ANDREW: On the let go of — one is the urge to jump in and do everything myself, which from time to time still does happen, although I have actually worked on that quite a bit. So in other words: delegate. The other part of letting go of — I think it’s just the need for, I don’t know the right way to put it, but it’s the same as the first point, but to own the process myself. And so having a little bit more trust in the team that if they know where they’re going, that they’re capable enough of getting there. On the pick-up side, I would say a lot more focus on, frankly, coaching them, — which would be a new skill for me. And then I have really gained from times when a manager has stepped in, or knew when to step in, in order to help protect the team in some way to not let us go off the rails, see a cliff before we drive over it. Being able to know how to do that. It sounds a little abstract, but that’s something that I think I’ve learned and really appreciated as more of a doer myself, for managers and leaders.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So I have, letting go of doing everything yourself, letting go of owning the process yourself. And picking up, delegating, trusting their capabilities to get there, coaching them, and supporting them.
ANDREW: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is really interesting, when you just look at the pick-up piece — delegate, trust them to get there, coach, support — it’s a very different role than being a doer. And so for you, like, how do you experience that as a different role? Does that feel comfortable, not comfortable? [laughter] Now you’re shaking your head.
ANDREW: I love the challenge of it, but it’s very different than what has gotten me here. How I’ve demonstrated value to other people and frankly, to myself. It’s less tangible sometimes. I coach, I have one-on-ones, and there’s times when they leave the room, the Zoom, and I’m like, “did they get what I was saying? Did they pick it up? I don’t know.” And I have to trust that they’re processing. And it’s just hard, and it’s hard to know tangibly in the moment. Whereas like a model — I crack the model, and I present the insight, then everybody’s like, “oh yeah, that makes sense.”
MURIEL WILKINS: No, this is it. The fact that you just said, it’s different in terms of how you have had to demonstrate value to others and demonstrate value to yourself. The formula has changed. Okay? The formula has changed. And so, you can either get with the new formula or not. But what I’m going to tell you is if you choose the not, it’s going to be a lot more painful for you. Okay, so I think step number one is redefining what the value is that you do bring as a leader, regardless of how intangible it is. Okay, what is the value that you bring? And in the same way that I asked you earlier, “how do you define success for you as a manager in this role?” What are the leading indicators that tell me that I am at least on path to creating this value in this new defined way? Not using the success metrics and the leading indicators from what I’ve been doing in past roles because it’s a different game.
ANDREW: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you were to create your dashboard, your own personal managerial dashboard, for the role that you’re in today — what would show up differently on that dashboard that would tell you, “okay, yup, I’m actually creating value here?”
ANDREW: Yeah. Wow. It’s a great question. Yeah. It’s really, I think now, it would be much more focused on — so if we took these, for example, supporting how many risks was I able to help the team either discover or mitigate in advance? Delegating would be, quite frankly — actually even higher level than all of this, how much time am I spending on people versus Excel? There’s a problem-solving component to it that I need to help the team. But how much time am I actually spending with the managers on a regular cadence? What topics are they bringing up to me? And then there’s probably some level of what are stakeholders – like How do they perceive the team? Do they get the support? Do they get the partnership that they need? So being much more plugged into stakeholders than I probably ever have been.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s a great start. And I would say, maybe that’s your assignment coming out of this is create your dashboard that is synced up to creating and defining value in this new way, as a manager of managers. Because then that will give you a better sense of where you should be spending your time. And it will also give you a better sense on a day in day out basis of whether you are adding value or not. The reason you’re feeling like, “oh my gosh, is even helpful? It’s so intangible. I don’t have anything to show for it. I’m just having conversation, after conversation, after conversation, but there’s no physical deliverable that I can say, look, look, this is what I did.” That’s normal because your job is about getting work done through other people, not doing the work necessarily yourself. So if your job is to get work done through others or to move things through others, then what are the underlying behaviors and actions that you need to take in order to do that? And how will you know?
MURIEL WILKINS: As “Andrew” becomes clearer in defining what is required of him at this next level of leadership, he also realizes that so much of his success will rely on his ability to work through others, rather than to do the work directly. So he’s now ready to start exploring what it means to start coaching the team he’s leading — a skill he’s mentioned that he doesn’t have a ton of experience in. For that reason, I think it’s important for “Andrew” to have a concrete understanding of what coaching is in his role. Let’s pick back up as I ask him, “what does it mean to be a coach as a manager?”
ANDREW: So in the past, I would’ve said, “components of coaching such as providing good feedback, in the way that the individual wants to receive feedback.” I do think, now, as I am thinking more about coaching, it’s much more about, “do I understand what their goals are?” Do I understand maybe, be very clear on where I see the gaps and helping them and pushing them to start to address those gaps. There’s the short-term feedback piece of it on how they’re doing, but it’s much more about understanding, I guess back to our vision point, where are they trying to go as an individual? How are they trying to grow their career and develop? That part is new, not brand new, because I’ve had good managers who’ve done that. But being on the other side of the table is a different experience.
MURIEL WILKINS: As a manager, it’s not so much that you’re a coach, it’s that you’re using coaching skills to manage. Coaching skills is about your ability to help the other articulate what their goals are. And by the way, a lot of people think about it in terms of career development and professional development. And that is one area where you can use coaching skills, but you can also use it in terms of just in time work. One of your managers is working through an issue with their staff or working through an issue on the project. You can coach them through the situation. So that’s situational coaching. And you would use the same skill — helping them articulate what the goal is, what are they trying to drive to? Then helping them come up with, “well, what choices do they have? What approaches, what strategies can they use?” Helping them increase their awareness around what might get in the way, or what opportunities they actually have that they can leverage to help them meet their goal? And that’s where the feedback comes into play. And then the last component is helping them determine what actions they need to take. You’re probably doing it already, you’re probably using these skills already. It’s just not being done intentionally in a, “huh, this is a situation where this person needs some coaching.” You want to coach based on the need. “Is this a situation or is this an area where coaching is warranted?” Because coaching is only one style, one muscle, of management. There are times when the management style you’re going to need, or the management approach, is going to be more directive. If the house is on fire, it’s probably not the right time to coach. You just want to say, “get out!” Okay. So you have to articulate for yourself and also be clear around what are the situations in which coaching is warranted from me, as a manager, and that is the muscle that I need to use. And now, let me activate that muscle. And then when you activate the muscle, then it becomes, “well, how do I do that?” Which is usually in my communication. So am I asking questions that are helping in those different areas? Am I providing suggestions? Am I providing resources? And as you said, one area that you can use those coaching skills with is in helping in their career growth and their professional development growth. But I guarantee you, there are many, many other areas where you can also use those coaching skills to help them. I made an assertion without checking in with you which is, you’re probably using these coaching skills already. And so, to what extent do you feel you are, without having called it coaching?
ANDREW: I certainly think if a direct report comes to me with a problem, I will help them diagnose what the problem is. And then, if we need to escalate it, come up with a clear structure around options, what are the trade-offs, things of that nature. So in that sense, I think I’m doing it. It’s maybe just the step before being intentional about, “what do they need in this moment?” Because I tend to be more like, “okay, I’m just going to do what I would do.” That’s my knee jerk reaction. And a lot of times it works. [laughter]
MURIEL WILKINS: Until it doesn’t. [laughter]
ANDREW: Until it doesn’t. So that’s where I need the, and it’s probably just looking at my own style, and saying, “hey, where has that worked? Where has that not worked?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. You want to look at your own style, where has it worked, where has it hasn’t worked? And I’ll push that a little further. Your role is now to be very in tune with what is happening in the landscape, what is happening — what is going on with your managers? And this is why, Andrew, it’s actually really important to as much as possible to not get so mired in the weeds that you’re, again, you’re sowing the trees, you’re missing the forest. Your job is to mind the forest, they’re chopping the wood. Okay. And so, from that standpoint, being intentional is spotting, “oh, this is an area,” whether it’s a long term, again, things like professional development, or short term, this person, as you mentioned with one of your direct reports right now, “this person is struggling with letting go of the doing” because that’s what they’re comfortable with. Okay. That’s very in the moment, situational, you’re seeing it play out. You’re not going to want to wait till that because they’re very comfortable doing what they’re doing. So they’re not going to raise their hand and say, “I think I have an issue with not letting go of what I used to do.” It’s your role to say, “okay, I’m going to raise it” and coach them through it. But the goal of you coaching them and you developing them, when you think about growing an employee, how do you actually define that? What does that mean to develop and grow someone?
ANDREW: Wow, there’s so many facets of it, but to me it’s about, first of all, giving them awareness and if there’s anything that’s preventing the type of behavior that we would expect. So for example, in this case of a manager, if they’re doing too much of the doing, are they even aware of that? And then providing them the tools and the feedback and the coaching that, over time, they’re able to work on it themselves and then come them back and say, “hey, this is how it’s going.” And hopefully I can still be a sounding board for them and give them additional advice. But it’s really, it’s empowering. It’s empowering the individual.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you said around is over time, they are able to do it themselves. And so how do you do that? You can’t do it by doing it for them repeatedly. You can show them — there’s a difference between doing it for them and showing them. The doing, when we tend to just do it for the other person, here’s the thing. It’s veiled as like, “oh, we want to help, and we’re being supportive,” but it actually is a form of control. It’s a form of control. So it is the antithesis of the word you use, which is to empower them. Okay. Now, again, let me be really clear — not all situations call for coaching. Okay. So I think what you’re experiencing right now is a realization that you need a variety of muscles. So understanding what they are, and then understanding when to use them, and then actually being very intentional around using them. Okay. If you don’t do those two, three things, you’re always going to default to whatever your preferred muscle is. And the rest will either never be built or they’ll just go into atrophy. To me, your story really right now is about continuing to onboard and transition into this larger scope of being a manager of managers and how you do that. So we’ve covered a lot of ground. I’d love to just hear from you what your key takeaways are and what you think you’re going to be putting in motion to help you in this role.
ANDREW: All right. So this has been really, really, really helpful, because I think it’s helped me just rethink and redefine where I add value, as a leader. I’m excited about this next stage because it is different. And it’s really, to me, around how do I set the vision for where we’re trying to go? What are the outcomes we’re driving to? What does success look like? What’s the destination? And then driving to clarity around this for me now means that we have a shared understanding of where we’re going and at least an agreement that that’s the direction of travel and that we’re moving. And that one, in particular, I think, one is I’m going to be, for the vision setting piece, I’m going to be thinking about how do I uncover or discover that across the different stakeholders I’m working with? How do I translate that into something that I can then share with my team so that they understand what their role is within this broader vision? And then I think the last thing that I took away, around now being a manager of managers, is really using different muscles. Coaching is one of those muscles, but understanding in what situations do I need to flex different muscles — and really being very intentional about how to use that. But I also love the fact that, I may not have all of those muscles yet, but that’s something that I can develop over time and that’ll help me refine and get better at it, even though I’m not there yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. And I love that you used the word yet. So thank you. I really, really appreciate what you brought to the table today. And I’m so glad we were able to talk through it.
ANDREW: Thank you so much, Muriel. This was awesome.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Andrew” is facing what many are challenged with, as they transition from being a manager of individual contributors to a manager of managers — what is also known as passage three in the book,
The Leadership Pipeline
. And the biggest difference “Andrew” and others experience at this new level is that now their sole job is to manage. They need to let go of individual tasks and instead they need to focus on critical skills — like measuring their direct reports’ progress as managers and coaching them in that area. What is also key at this stage is their ability to connect the dots between their group and the broad strategic issues that affect the overall business, as a way to set vision and direction for the managers. This is all new for “Andrew,” but with more clarity on his rolling responsibilities and his commitment to developing these areas, he now has a better chance of effectively leading at this next level.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time:
DENISE: So I’m navigating through the growing pains and the change at the same time. I don’t want to come off defensive to my peers. I don’t want to be, and I always joke about this at the office, I’m like, I feel like I’m that mouse on
Who Moved My Cheese?
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter at Muriel M. Wilkins, or on Instagram at Coach Muriel Wilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward — share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 4: On the Brink of Burnout
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network work. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Ellie.” She’s a leader who’s done well in previous technology roles, but always felt like she’s ready for more in terms of leadership responsibility. When she was offered the opportunity to lead at a startup, she stepped up and her ability to figure things out and get things done is exactly what’s valued in that fast-paced environment.
ELLIE: So it’s a startup, which means we don’t have a lot of the basic foundation that most companies would have that are doing similar things. So there’s a lot of people wearing many hats, and there’s a lack of experienced leadership who can just come into the company and say, “I know how to build this practice,” build it, and then it’s done. So we have people who are having to kind of figure it out, and I’m one of those people that’s one of the figuring it out types.
MURIEL WILKINS: And while Ellie’s resourcefulness and work ethic is driving her success at the startup, it’s also causing her to feel burned out and to question her ability and desire to lead.
ELLIE: It is burnout, but it’s also just, I either don’t think I’m capable of the job, so maybe I don’t have those leadership skills, or maybe I’m not quite ready for it that people thought I was. And now that I’m in it, I’m realizing I’m maybe not. I’m very flip floppy about it because I do actually think I’m quite good at it. So now I’m in this weird position of like this is a lot of work. I don’t think I want it that bad, and I end up just kind of frustrated with the circle of insanity that I’m constantly caught in to the point now where I’m just thinking, “You know what? Maybe this just isn’t for me, and maybe I should just go back to more technical work.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Burnout will make you question your life choices, and that’s where Ellie is at the moment. Does she want to be a leader? And if so, how does she lead without constantly feeling burned out? And because we all experience burnout differently, it’s important that I understood what it looks like for her. So that’s where we start the conversation. I want to kind of get a better understanding of what burnout feels like to you. Okay. Everybody has different thresholds and experience it differently. In your world, if I were to sit in your seat, what does it feel like to feel either on the brink of or actually in burnout mode?
ELLIE: I would say on the brink of is the constant exhaustion and just feeling like this isn’t worth it. I have a lot of conflicting priorities and I keep asking, “Okay, what can go? What can I drop?” And it’s always been like a, “Oh yeah, let’s talk about that later type of mentality. And somebody recently gave me feedback to say, “Why don’t you just say no?” Don’t just say, “Yeah, I’ll do this,” but instead just say, “No, I cannot do this.” And then see if that changes the dialogue. So that’s something that I knew I’m going to try.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how did that resonate with you when somebody gave you that suggestion to just say no?
ELLIE: I’m reluctant to say no, to be honest, because I want to demonstrate my value. I’m afraid of losing a little bit of the traction that I’ve made, but at the same time, it’s also what I want because I feel like it’s too much. So I have this internal conflict with myself right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think one of the questions that we need to get clear on is what it is that you want, right? Because I think this tension that you’re feeling is a bit of kind of going to the ice cream store and you’re only allowed three scoops and you’re like, “No, I want the vanilla and the chocolate and the butter pecan and the chocolate chip and the pistachio. And oh, by the way, I don’t want to gain any weight.” Story of my life. And that is ideal, but that’s also kind of magical thinking. What I want to talk to you about is shifting from magical thinking around the ideal of the way that we would love for things to be versus facing the reality of what they are, and then thinking strategically around how to move through it.
ELLIE: I think my greatest value is that I can make decisions. I can make judgment calls. I can give people direction if they’re lacking or if they’re unclear. I am that strong voice in a meeting that says, “We’re here to do this and we’re not leaving until we accomplish this,” and I time box it to make sure it happens. I have vision, I have strategy, and I can execute on it. I’m not all talk. I can also deliver on my vision. So that does seem to be where that natural leadership comes in is because a lot of people are maybe reluctant or don’t want that type of responsibility or accountability, and I do. So I thought that that was what I wanted, but if that means nonstop working all across all day every day, on weekends, feeling exhausted and feeling burnt out and not being able to sleep, then to me, that’s not what I want.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. It’s important to kind of get out of this cycle of burnout so that you can think through this a little more clearly. Okay? Because when we make decisions in distress, in burnout, or as I’ve heard somebody once say, “Never make decisions when you are lonely, angry or hungry.” Right?
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Never leads to anything good. And I think the same is from a burnout standpoint. I think we ought to kind of think through a couple of different levels. One is how do you deal with situations when you start feeling frustrated? I think the second piece is this, what does it mean to be a leader? Are your expectations aligned with what it means to be a leader? It requires being adaptable. That’s the part that makes it challenging is, can you pull at different muscles at different places in time? So on the one hand, you said part of what you think is you bring to the table in terms of being valid is your strategic thinking and visionary and being able to see things and then being able to get it done. And that is one dimension of leadership. There’s another dimension, which is the people side of it in terms of your team and coaching them, et cetera. There’s also this component, which I think is pertinent for you, which is the ability to prioritize and focus. And the question behind that is, am I doing the right things at the right time to get to where we need to go? And so when somebody told you, “Just say no.” What they’re in essence telling you is you need to create some boundaries around what you’re doing and what’s most important at this time. However, if you’re operating from a place of fear of not being able to demonstrate your value, there’s no way you’re going to place any boundaries because you’re constantly going to be in this, “I need to show my value. I need to show my value. I need to show my value.” Where does that come from?
ELLIE: I’m constantly in fear that if I don’t demonstrate my value, somebody else might come in and take this opportunity away from me. I think in a startup, that competitive feeling has actually gotten worse than when I worked at big corporate environments. Change is slow in a big corporation, it’s quick in a startup. So that’s why I’m starting to internalize that of maybe this wasn’t the right course of action. Is it too late for me to course correct? Should I consider another career? And now in my current role, I’m very conflicted. It’s like my CEO is supportive of downscaling my role, which I want because it’s too much. But at the same time, I don’t want it because I do like the leadership. I do like the responsibility, and I do like the accountability. I just wish it didn’t require so many hours of my day. I have entrepreneurial parents. They both started their own business. They were their own bosses. I see this as being an opportunity to flex those entrepreneurial skills that I’ve learned from my parents. I do see myself being a C level in my career. As I get older, I see that being something that I want and something that I could do, but I think the path to get there is a lot harder than I thought it would be.
MURIEL WILKINS: So in your current situation, you do have leadership responsibilities, but they feel like a lot, right? It requires a lot more workload than you would like. There’s a question around how much boundaries you’re placing, and if you were to say no to certain things, would you still be able to perform in your role? You have a boss who says, “Hey, I’m willing to take things off your plate,” which would then bring your workload down while keeping the title?
ELLIE: The discussions that we’ve had about ways to scale back my role would mean my role would change, which mean a new title.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. In your current role, you’re getting the feedback that no, you have the leadership capabilities that we need, and they’re well valued.” Am I correct?
ELLIE: Yeah, that’s fair. So the doubt comes from small off the side comments that I probably take too personally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like what?
ELLIE: So for example, I’m working on an internal project to develop some key processes that we’ve been lacking, and it’s really going to help solve a lot of the problems that we’ve been having because our departments are just not talking to each other at the right times and setting the right expectations for what each other needs. And said CEO has expressed concern/annoyance that that’s not going as quickly as it should. And I explicitly asked him about it, and he was very careful to ensure that I understood that it wasn’t doubt in me and how I’m leading the project, it was just doubt that it was resulting in the outcomes that he was hoping for. But the damage was already done to my confidence a little bit. So I don’t know if anything he could have said would’ve made me feel better. I’d already beaten myself up about it, basically.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So there’s a piece here around extending some empathy to yourself. If you were talking to one of your closest friends and that closest friend was sharing that particular example that they had experienced at work, what would you say to them?
ELLIE: Probably everything you would expect. I would say-
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t want you to tell me what you would expect. I really want you for five minutes. Just humor me, right? Make believe I’m that friend. What are you going to tell me? I messed up. I feel like I messed up. I’m supposed to do this project. It’s highly valued for the company and my boss basically said he’s not happy with the way… He tried to make me feel okay about it and make it feel like it’s not about me, but I know he’s annoyed and I feel terrible about it. I don’t know if this is for me anymore.
ELLIE: I am everyone’s biggest champion. I might get emotional because I realize how stupid that sounds.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s okay. It’s not stupid. It’s real.
ELLIE: Yeah, I would say that “Get out of your head.” Like, “I think you just need to pivot a little bit to understand what they’re asking for. It sounds like you’re on the right track, but you’re just getting distracted, I think, and he’s giving you the opportunity to get back on track. So don’t take it so personally.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I can’t even say it to you any better, to be honest. I can’t.
ELLIE: I think a big part of the problem is that in my personal life that those seeds of doubt actually do come from my parents. Oh, this is going to be like a counseling session. So it doesn’t matter if the whole world tells me I’m good enough or that I’m great at what I do. I always have that voice in the back of my head that says, “Yeah, but you didn’t do this that I wanted you to do.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes when I coach, the conversation takes a turn where neither I nor my client expected it to go. And in Ellie’s case, this was that moment where she realized that the seed to her self-doubt was not planted in this role, but rather a long time ago. As a coach, it’s important that I be aware of my client’s past experiences, but be very clear that it’s not a counseling or therapy session. My job is not to help them unpack and resolve their past. I approach my clients with compassion and empathy while helping them see what choices they have in front of them so that they can be strategic on how to move forward to meet their goals. And so with that in mind, we move forward with the conversation. And so here’s the thing. We all have background and context that we grew up with, right? At some point, we become adults.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: The beautiful thing about becoming an adult, you get to create your own voice, not your parent’s voice, not your teacher’s voice, not your friend’s voice. We can talk about what’s the right job for you and where do you want to go next, and all these external things, and that might help you in the short term. So they have its place. It will give you some short-term relief, just like switching jobs will give you a short-term relief. Getting a pay raise will give you short-term relief, but based on what you just shared, it’s not going to give you the sustainability of being able to play this leadership game for the long haul.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? So what would it look like for you to be your own champion rather than relying on others to give you that voice of confidence?
ELLIE: That’s a great question. The role that I’m in right now isn’t necessarily the role I went to school for. So I am lacking a lot of experience in how to build this type of department for a startup, because I always worked at big corporations previously. So they were already built and they were imperfect at the time. So it was easier for me to pick apart the imperfections than to actually build it myself. So one of the things that I had said to my boss was, “If I’m going to do this, I need time. I need to do research, I need to learn.” And I opened the door for the possibility of maybe I’m not the right fit for that, because in a startup, you don’t have time. So I had said, “It might be in your best interest to find somebody who already knows what the formula for success is and then parachute them in to do it.” And he didn’t want to do that. He said, “Nobody will be able to build it as good as you could because you understand, you have the relationships with the team, you do the work that’s necessary to do it right.” So when I see myself in back-to-back meetings all day, it just feels like I’m dealing with the tactical day-to-day stuff, and I’m not getting that mental capacity to actually strategize and do the planning and think.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Was there ever a conversation about the things you already have on your plate and how some of those things could be taken off to give you room to do this other thing?
ELLIE: Yeah, so that’s where the feedback about me just saying no came in was because I was, again, I actively work to take things off my plate, and then something always gets added, and it’s usually by him, which is the ironic part. So what I ended up deciding last night when I couldn’t sleep is, “I’m just going to start taking myself out of things. I’m going to decide where my time should be best spent.” As usual, as long as I tell him this is what I want to do, he’ll probably say, “Okay, sounds good.” So I’m not expecting a lot of resistance, but that was how my first attempt or my last attempt to have that conversation went.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I think that it’s worth a try, right? It’s worth a try for you to put a stake in the ground rather than… Because it’s clear he trusts you.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s clear that based on what you’ve said before, when you give direction, he responds.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sounds like it’s when you sort of give options of, “Well, it could be this, it could be that,” and he wants all the ice cream.
ELLIE: Yeah, you’re absolutely right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I think you need to start reining it in and say, “There are not 24 flavors. There are three flavors. Pick one.” And that is creating focus on what’s essential And putting a stake in the ground for yourself. And a suggestion that I would have for you is to not place the full responsibility of figuring out what are the things that you can delegate just on yourself. It’s actually a great opportunity to engage your team in that conversation, to sit down and say, “Hey, so here’s everything that’s going on. Here’s the highest and best use of my time. Here’s the highest and best use of your time. There are some things that we either need to say no to, and we’re going to purge, we’re going to do some spring-cleaning and we’re just not going to do anymore.” So purge some things and then reallocate others. And oftentimes the things that you can reallocate as a leader to some of your team members, while they might be a burden for you, are developmental opportunities for your team members. So engage them in that discussion. From my standpoint, the way I see it is it’s not a question about are you a good leader or not? I think you’re really at a place around, how do I scale my leadership up?
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? It’s like when you play sports, when you’re younger, the fields are smaller. The soccer field is smaller, the tennis court is smaller, the balls are softer, whatever it is you’re playing with. And then as you get older, the court becomes bigger. It’s the same field, same game, but it scales up. And it’s the same with where you are in your career progression, where you are right now. I don’t think is necessarily a question of, am I a good leader? I think it’s a question of, am I building the muscles to be able to scale up my leadership? And oh, by the way, this is your first time having to do it. So cut yourself some slack. You’re in learning mode. You are in a situation where it’s clear, you’re getting support from the top and you’re getting support from your team. And so it starts exercising that muscle of being able to ask for help, to being able to ask for support, and it not being a sign of weakness.
ELLIE: I think you’ve just brought to my attention something that I never really thought about. So I just started to think to myself like, I don’t ever recall a manager asking for help or highlighting themselves as a risk. They do seem to all have this facade, if you will, of knowing everything and having all the answers and being the smartest person in the room. So I think that might be part of the reason why I never think about that. I think that I have to emulate how my previous managers have behaved if I’m going to be that successful too.
MURIEL WILKINS: A large piece of your frustration is you’ve been trying to do things the same way that you always have and they don’t fit in this scenario. Okay?
ELLIE: Yeah, you’re absolutely right.
MURIEL WILKINS: For your current situation, I want you to focus on the things that are within your control. What are the steps that you can take around those different areas that will help in terms of alleviating some of the burnout and frustration that you’re feeling, particularly around workload. So can you think of a time either recently or something that you have coming up that might be challenging, where you’re going to focus more around or where it would’ve been helpful to focus more on what’s within your control?
ELLIE: Some of the things that I’ve come to my manager about and address my concern, I feel like I knew if I was just honest with him, that he probably already knew or had suspicions about a lot of the issues or the concerns that I had, but he just didn’t have anybody telling him. And people are not in the habit of going to their leaders with problems or bad news. So sometimes those conversations can be really hard to have, knowing that this was not something I was comfortable doing, but knowing it was something I had to do because I knew that if I did air out the dirty laundry that it would bring change, much needed change. It’s like the option that I had been choosing to that point was feeling like there was nothing I could do to change the way things were and feeling like there was no point in making noise about it. It would just make me seem like I was complaining or I was unhappy. And so that’s why I had a lot of stress about it, because I was trying to tell myself, no, you need to do this. This is the right thing to do. He will listen, he will understand. Yeah, sure enough, at the end of the meeting, he was like, “Thank you.” He was like, “Thank you so much for telling me.” He’s like, “I knew everything that you told me, but I had no confirmation.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I think a big part of the work for you is recognizing how you’re feeling when you’re staying up at night, when you have that anxiety or whatnot, it’s like, what is coming at me that is changing or making me sway one way or the other versus what is within me? What is my voice saying? Let me hear myself. What are my options? The technical, the big leadership word of using this is, do you have agency? Meaning, the wherewithal within to say, “All right, what’s within my control? What actions can I take?” Seeing all that and then making a decision.
ELLIE: I often think about this, it’s like I feel like the answers are there, I just don’t know. I just don’t have the experience. I feel like I missed a class in school or something about how to deal with these type of challenges, and I’ll have a new Rolodex of information that I can pull from. So that’s why when you said just now, I’m like, “Is there a course I can take to do that?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Here’s the thing. I have good news and bad news. The good news is that at every stage in your career, in your life, there are different things to learn. The bad news is, I don’t think it’s bad news actually, but you might hear it as bad news, is I think anyone who was ever to claim that they have learned everything that there is to be a leader is falling short in some way or another, because leadership is a continuous… It’s like life. It is a continuous journey of learning. Why? Because being a leader is the ability to deal with the complexity of what lies in front of us and ahead of us within all of the complexity that you’re dealing with, the complexity of humans, the complexity of technology, the complexity of the world, the complexity of pandemics and politics. So it requires an increased capacity to deal with complexity. Well, if that complexity is always changing, does it not mean that we are also required to continue learning? Yes. You can read as much as you want, and what I would suggest is that it doesn’t end. You become a student of leadership rather than a achiever of leadership. Two different things, two different ways of being a leader. And that’s where we kind of actually get to the essence of being a leader rather than just a title of being a leader. Like many high achievers, Ellie wants the surefire recipe to lead, but what she doesn’t realize is that leadership is a nuanced, multidimensional pursuit. On the one hand, there’s the external dimension, the tactical, the technical skills we can learn. It’s what we often refer to as the outer game of leadership, how we do things. But the other side of leadership is the inner game. It’s what values we hold as leaders, what beliefs we bring about ourselves, about other people, how we think through things. That’s the inner game. And Ellie, like many of us, has spent a lot of time on the external trying to fix things by upping her skills, which is all good and very necessary. But now she’s hit a wall and she realizes that she needs to balance it out by also doing the internal work of how she leads. And a big piece of this hinges on her ability to deal with her frustration and burnout more constructively than she has in the past. So we’ll pick back up at the point where we look at strategies she can use to face those moments. There’s something I want to introduce to you based on this notion of feeling stressed out and feeling frustrated, because as I said before, we all get stressed out and get frustrated, and I think it’s important that A, you accept that, but B, have a framework on how to deal with that since it seems to be something that’s coming up for you quite a bit. And the first is to recognize the cycle you’re in. So again, when thinking about what you’ve shared with me, I think about it in terms of this burnout cycle or frustration cycle. So you have an expectation around what needs to happen, the expectation either gets met or doesn’t get met. If it gets met, then it makes you happy and you’re good, right? If it doesn’t get met, then it leads to frustration. If the frustration isn’t resolved in some way, it leads to burnout. That’s one cycle, and it’s a vicious loop. A different loop could be… Well, you tell me. What could a different loop look like?
ELLIE: Well, I guess based on what you described, when I sense that I’m getting frustrated, altering my outlook to be, “This is a challenge. How do I learn from this?” And what is it about this situation that I’m in that is actually triggering the frustration? And is it something within my control that I can alter to reduce the impact of said frustration perhaps? So recognizing that this is frustration would be first because you have to kind of get ahead of it before it gets to the point of wanting to quit or retreat or whatever that looks like, identifying what’s the cause of it, or at least what’s the contributor to it. It might just be the straw that broke the camel’s back and not necessarily the problem just so much as the trigger.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you already are aware of… Because I asked you, what does it feel like when you start getting frustrated? So look out for those signals.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think if I were to summarize what you said, I think there are a couple of steps you can take when you hit those situations. So step one is identify what you’re struggling with. The second is exactly what you said, what’s in your control versus what’s outside of your control so that you can focus on what’s within your control. It doesn’t mean that the things outside of your control don’t exist, but you’re just going to put them to the side.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: In the midst of this struggle, in the midst of what’s challenging yourself, this one is very important for you, is what are you telling yourself about the situation and about yourself? And is what you’re telling yourself serving you? What would you tell a good friend of yours right now, same exercise you worked through earlier, so that you can change or shift, not even change, shift that inner dialogue to one that’s actually going to be helping you in this process rather than working against you? So identify the situation. What are you telling yourself? What’s within your control? What’s side of your control? And once you figure that out, then you can go to, “Okay, so what choices do I have in front of me? What choices do I have? What can I say yes or no to? Where can I ask for help? What can I start, stop, continue.” Ask yourself, “What choices do I have?” And then you can make a decision around, out of all the choices I have in front of me, which one, which ones are most aligned with what I need and what the organization need or whatever the goal is. Why don’t we spend a little bit of time with you articulating what your key takeaways are from this conversation. So if you had two or three main takeaways that you’re walking away with, what would they be for you?
ELLIE: I think the exercise of focusing on what I control is going to be really important. And in the spirit of beating myself up all the time, it is something that I always give feedback to other people too, is why are you stressing about these things that are out of your control? That’s such a waste of your energy. I need to listen to my own advice, which is, it’s so common sense. And then that’s the second activity is I need to talk myself off the ledge that I constantly put myself on, and I need to be my biggest fan. Because like I said, I don’t know why that is. I constantly uplift the people in my team and take them out of their own self-doubt and tell them how great they are and what their strengths are and what I see in them. And I try to encourage them and motivate them, and yet I don’t do it for myself. So I think that is a really good exercise that I’m going to take away immediately is, if I was my own friend, what would I tell myself? I think that’s a really good exercise because as soon as you said it, I was like, “Damn it, you got me.” As I’m talking to you on the screen, on my other screen, I am looking at my calendar. I always have it open, and I am immediately excited to start clearing these back-to-back meetings, getting myself out of more activities, empowering my team. I loved your idea about coming to my team with all the things that I’m working on, and just see if anybody volunteers for anything. I love that idea because not only do I know that they will, but I think that they’ll be excited to help me. So I think that everyone will be excited to not be met with me saying, “Oh, I don’t know. I’ll have to think about that.” Instead, I’ll be asking them, “Well, here’s everything that’s on my plate. What would you like to take?” So I’m most excited after this meeting to start seeing if I can clear my calendar. That alone would be a huge one for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, listen-
ELLIE: And keeping it clear, not letting it get replaced.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so that’s the part, right? That’s the part is making sure that there’s follow-through and that you keep it sustainable. And if what it means is maybe it’s every month putting in your calendar that you have to do a calendar purging or every quarter, that will be a reminder that you have to do that. So I’m excited for you. So thank you. I really want to thank you for sharing and allowing me to be part of your process today.
ELLIE: Thank you so much. I think I really needed this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ellie left our coaching conversation with some actions to take that would help her deal with burnout, prioritizing with her boss, delegating to her team, and being clearer about the boundaries she needs to effectively do her job. She also left with a greater understanding that scaling up in leadership doesn’t always have to lead to burnout, but only if you have the skills to respond constructively when you start feeling overwhelmed and take action on things that are within your control. And finally, Ellie gained a deeper and perhaps newfound appreciation that she is human, something high achievers often forget, and that by having more empathy, understanding, and compassion for herself, it will help her lead more effectively and sustainably going forward. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
SPEAKER 1: A colleague up here, he’s on the executive management team. He literally told me in a meeting that I wasn’t an executive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Do I Stop Being Defensive?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Denise” to protect her confidentiality. She’s recently been promoted to vice president at a large insurance company. She worked her way up in the industry from an entry level position into leadership and has really embraced this role. But it’s happened at a time when there’s also been a lot of change.
DENISE: For a long time, I had been a very small, incubated startup, boots to the ground type of organization, so you sort of had to do everything. I ran the innovation team and I also ran to make sure I had coffee in the office. I also made sure … It was like a lot of everything, right? Fast forward, a lot of shifting that’s happening, and so I was sort of the historian of the group, but we have all these new people that have joined the team and they’re very passionate about what they bring.
MURIEL WILKINS: After a lot of work in many successes growing her division with her team, there was a merger, and now she’s the legacy person on the new team she works with day in and out. She feels constantly questioned and defensive about the way things work and about the culture she helped build.
DENISE: So, I’m navigating through the growing pains and the change at the same time. I don’t want to come off defensive to my peers. I don’t want to be and I always joke about this at the office. I’m like, I feel like I’m that mouse on, who moved my cheese? I feel like I’m that mouse and I’m like, Nope, things are changing. Absolutely not. I embrace change. In fact, I mean, that’s why I love being in innovation because I embrace change. I just think it’s coming in, and I feel like I’m always defending what we built for the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: Denise is wondering how to navigate her new leadership role and how to adapt to a whole new team, while at the same time, figuring out what to keep from the past and what to let go of so she can be effective in her new environment. I started our conversation by asking a bit more about her current situation.
DENISE: I currently am a vice president within my organization. I was recently promoted, almost six years ago. I came on to another company as a startup. When I came into that organization, I was very … I had a lot of experience in the industry, and so I came in to start something fresh and brand new. For the last five and a half years, close to six, I had been part of that initial team to get things on get things on board, trying to get structure put in place. One of the things that was important to us was that we not do anything like we’ve done in the past. So, it’s a very old industry, and so we said, okay. I was part of that initial team, right? So, I was on the ground floor. Throughout the years, I had been given additional responsibilities. There were positions that came up and I thought, yep, I can be in this space. Funny enough, this role was presented when I was going to leave to another company. I said, “Hey, look, guys, I’m leaving.” We had just been purchased by the company I’m working for now. They were like, “What do you mean your lead? No, you can’t.” So, we continued on through that process. I went back and forth and literally made a decision on the last day to say, “Okay, I’ll stay.” The only kicker was, my boss, I don’t think he wanted me in that role. I think he was forced into giving me that role, but I always had that underneath like, I don’t think he was completely convinced that this is where he wanted me to be. Fast forward, I’m in the role. We don’t announce it to months later. In that process, he also hired like eight other vice presidents. He hired all these smart, powerful people coming in and just churning things around. It was so uncomfortable for me because we needed the help, if we were going to continue to grow as an organization, we needed the help. Now we have this team of people that I should be excited to say, great, we can share their well. But it turned. I mean, authentically, I can tell you that I started feeling like I had to defend everything I did.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. All this change happened very recently in terms of the new people coming on board, etc.
DENISE: I started feeling … It’s overwhelming. So, you have the small with a little bit of people, you bring eight new personalities into a group with no real onboarding. You start questioning whether or not you still add value, you start questioning what you did. We knew why we did it at the time, but now everyone’s like, “Well, why are you doing this? And what’s happening here.” That started the questioning and the defending, and that was my initial reaction. I would feel like I was looking from the outside in like, who is this person defending? This is it not me. I want to embrace change. I want to fight it though.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You want to embrace change, but you’ve been working in an industry that hasn’t really changed in a hundred years, right?
DENISE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which, by the way, fun fact, I worked in insurance.
DENISE: No way.
MURIEL WILKINS: That was like my initial career. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Okay. Let’s talk a little bit about how you’re experiencing these new people coming in, and you used a few words around feeling overwhelmed, feeling defensive. Give me a little bit, sort of color in terms of, what is happening there? If I were flying on the wall, how are you showing up?
DENISE: I feel that I am very quiet, which is unusual for me. That has been historically my mechanism of processing. So, I’ll just sit back because I don’t want to sound defensive. So, my mind is saying, don’t sound defensive, write down what they said. Don’t try to defend it. Of course, I just can’t stand it anymore. I’m like, stop, this is not right. This is what we’re doing. It’s culturally different. No one that was hired in looks like me. How I’m showing up at these meetings is don’t be a statistic, don’t do things that they would expect you to do. Process it, like look for positive intent. All of this chatter is happening in my brain why they’re saying things that I feel are not correct.
DENISE: They’re looking at it differently, but I don’t want to seem like I want to keep things the same way, because I don’t. I think change needs to happen. I want them to be more mindful on how they’re showing up. I feel like they’re super forceful, their ideas are it, like no one should question it, and my thing is, you don’t have enough street cred to come into a new you place and start driving these changes. I’m struggling with their approach, but all this chatter in my brain doesn’t allow me to focus on contribute to this meeting. You know differently. I feel like I shrink when I’m in that room, which is very uncomfortable for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what would it look like for you not to shrink?
DENISE: For me not to shrink would be them asking more questions versus forcing their opinions on. Also, on my side, is me contributing more, to say, yep, that’s a great idea, for example. Here are some things that we did in the past, this is some of the failure points, and these are some of the things that we learned from that we thought we could do differently, or we didn’t have the resources so I can feel more transparent. Part of it is I don’t feel that safety, that psychological safety and that space to say, “I know that you’ve done this before, we tried it, it didn’t work. Or maybe we didn’t have enough people to make it work correctly. I don’t feel I can be vulnerable with this team because I also started feeling like they don’t feel like I be in this space.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are you defending?
DENISE: I’m defending what we built. So, we did something different, and we were super proud of it, and so they’re coming in saying all of this stuff is broken, but we were still competitors to you. You all have been around for 50, 60 years in this space and we were two years in and we were taking customers from you. It’s just that feeling of, we did something good. We’re not at ground zero. We want to be able to build from the space. I’m hesitant to do it because I can hear myself, are you being defensive? Are you trying to prove a point? Will they ever listen to it? Because in their minds they’re saying, “I’m I came here to fix something, so you can’t tell me anything different.”
MURIEL WILKINS: When they are trying to sort of come in and fix something and you get defensive, how does it make you feel?
DENISE: It makes me feel sad, it makes me feel upset. I feel embarrassed. Like, oh, why did we think of that? Especially when there are ideas of like, hey, why aren’t you pulling this in? You start questioning. I start feeling that little sense of insecurity in the sense of I don’t belong here because I should have known that four years ago to do that. Things like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And is that true?
DENISE: Sometimes I think it is. I think it was a product of, at least my environment, we had a very lean staff, and so some things we just didn’t focus on. We just didn’t focus on those things. When I say it, it feels like an excuse. For me, as a professional, I don’t like to feel that people make excuses like, oh, it was because the office was hot and that’s why I couldn’t finish my work. Those excuses, I’ve always been a very excuses or results. You can’t have both, right? Which one is it? I kept using that inner dialogue for me and saying, I’m making an excuse of why I didn’t do it, so I’m not even going to say. I’m not even going to explain myself because I feel that I’m making an excuse. It’s this feeling that I get in my heart that I’m like, ugh, I under delivered.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if you under deliver then how does that make you feel?
DENISE: It makes me feel like I failed. I’ve always been a project manager. I’ve been in that career space for a very long time, and so it’s a very results oriented type of career. So, when you’re not seeing things pan out, you question how you could have done something differently.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. It’s a big challenge to be promoted to a higher leadership level, and it’s a big challenge to deal with a merger and be the only legacy person left. But there are also some underlying issues that I’ll want to learn more about, why Denise feels the need to hold back, why she’s worried about failure, and how she thinks about what she can control versus what she can’t. Let’s dive back in.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think we’ve gotten to sort of the core of what you’re feeling in terms of this, did I fail or showing up and being perceived as having failed. If we take it outside of this situation have you felt like that in any other situations?
DENISE: Oh God. Yes. Exercising, my weight goals, and everything in-between, my past relationships. I mean, I look at, which part of it was my fault? Where did I fail? What could I have done differently? It’s always this constant state of improvement, which I find that can get off balance. I’m always evaluating things and saying, okay, what’s my joint accountability in what just happens? What’s my part in all of it? And how could I have done that better? That inner dialogue, it just spins per weeks as I try to evaluate, what could I have done differently? I replay conversations that I’ve had. I look at, now that we all have to be on Zoom, I’m like, did I have the attitude face? Was I doing the stunk eye? Did they see me roll my eyes because I think I missed it? Those are the other areas where I feel like I felt that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: This feeling of, did I fail or feeling like you failed, ultimately, where does that get you?
DENISE: For me, I feel that, by replaying that reel in my head that I will do something better the next time, like I would do things better next time. When we’re in a group meeting, for example, one of the constant feedbacks I would get early on in my career was that you are not shy about talking, but you may shut other people down in the room. Your presence, without you even realizing it, may be sensed by others as bulldozing, and I actually got that feedback. They’re like, “I just feel like you bulldozed the meeting and you don’t allow this to speak and you’re not listening.” I’m like, “Okay, let me …” I replay it in my head. I try to pull it all together for myself and I try to do better the next time. When I feel myself feeling, feeling those feelings in my heart and that sense that I’m like, I’m frustrated. I’m like, watch your tone, take a deep breath. I try to do those things because of the feedback I received before.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. It sounds like it’s something you have faced before in terms of, it’s a familiar feeling, right? The familiar feeling is sending you this message of almost like red alert, red alert, red alert. You failed.
DENISE: Defend, defend, defend.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then defend, defend, defend, but no, you failed, failed, failed, defend, defend, defend, but no, you failed, failed, failed. I’m getting tired saying it. But I guess I want to understand, have you been told that you have failed?
DENISE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ever, ever, ever, ever, ever?
DENISE: Every.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, your interpretation of what’s happening is that you failed.
DENISE: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: Failing means what in your mind? What is your definition of failure?
DENISE: Missing the mark. Not, and I hate to say this, because as I’m talking through it, I guess that’s why the coaching works, is that feeling that you weren’t perfect. That feeling that, and it was controllable. It’s controllable, my weight loss journey, to me, it’s controllable. I decide what I wanna put in my mouth. I decide how much I wanna exercise. When I communicate that, someone feels, listen, you did this, you did X, Y, Z, it’s controllable. That I bulldoze it, it’s controllable.
MURIEL WILKINS: And yet you didn’t do it is what you feel like. Yeah, and it makes you feel like you weren’t perfect. Where did this expectation about being perfect, where does that come from?
DENISE: Oh, definitely my parents. Definitely my parents. My dad, not so much, because my dad was really good about saying, you can essentially do anything. You can learn anything. In his mind, there was nothing you couldn’t learn. His drive to you can do anything, I think created some insecurity for her. For her, growing up, we had to be perfect. We always had to look a certain way when we go outside, when we went to our family’s house, we … If you’re hungry, you can eat, but don’t eat too much because I don’t want them to think that we are not feeding you guys. It was like this constant thing throughout the years that you have this level of expectation. I think the first time I felt like, I screwed up big time. Only great things came out of it, but at that time, I felt like I made this mistake that I could not fix.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I want you to recognize that it’s in those moments, when you’re feeling like, I did something that I now can’t go back and fix, that you interpret as a failure, and then it leads you to, well, how do I make sure I stay safe within that failure? I defend what I did. I want you to hold onto that. I find it really interesting that you when you talked about your dad, you said he felt like there’s nothing you can’t learn. Doesn’t sound like he said, you can’t fail. I’ve heard this quote, I don’t know who brought it up. I don’t know who created this quote, but I will tell you one of my favorite Peloton instructor always says it, so I’m just going to say that Jess Sims made this quote up. It’s that, “FAIL stands for first attempt in learning.”
DENISE: I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Whereas, where I think you are coming from is defining failure as not meeting expectations, and therefore, if I don’t meet expectations, it means I’m not perfect, and being not perfect means, and I’m gonna ask you if this is correct, means I’m not good enough.
DENISE: Because that was me. I’m like, am I in the right role? Should I not be here? Those questions are coming up every day.
MURIEL WILKINS: Every day. So, you are in a very familiar situation. This isn’t like the first time that you are facing this. It feels like it’s the first time and it feels overwhelming, but the fact that the matter is you’ve been through it before, it looks very familiar. You’re responding in the very same way where there external expectations that are placed on you and you feel like, if I don’t meet those, then it means that I have failed and that I’m not good enough. I’m going to ask you a question. Do you think you’re good enough for this role?
DENISE: Right now, today, I would say, no. I feel that there’s so much for me to learn, but everybody has become a VP for the first time at some place. So, it’s a first for someone in this role. I came into this role having experience and knowledge in the industry and being creative and driving what we have, what we see today, what was sold to this company, but I also think that so much I don’t know, and I think that makes me feel that I’m not good enough for it because I feel that I’m not at the same level with the women that I’m working with are in. So, I’m comparing. I go back and forth in saying, but they’ve also done this for longer than I have. They’ve so done this at this level for longer than I have. I feel like, am I giving myself an excuse as to why I’m not at that same level or should I be giving myself a break because I just started at this level?
MURIEL WILKINS: How does like that back-and-forth conversation you’re having feel to you?
DENISE: Exhausting.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
DENISE: It’s exhausting,
MURIEL WILKINS: Exhausting. I gather you don’t really have the time to be exhausted. I mean, you’re in the role, other people are gonna be different than you, they always are. Whether it’s experience, look, gender, age, whatever, we’re all individual humans, we all have differences. And you’re feeling like you’re not good enough for the role today because you have a lot to learn. Does having a lot to mean that you’re not good enough for a role?
DENISE: No, it doesn’t. It doesn’t. I never saw it that way. I feel like you have to come in. One of the things I would always say is behave in the role you wanna be in. I’ve always been a high performer in any of the roles that I’ve ever worked in throughout my career. I guess this is probably the most challenging, and not feeling like I’m still a high performer is uncomfortable.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know what? From what you share, you’ve been very uncomfortable situations in the past. I mean, I’m not trying to make light of it, but it’s like, okay, so here we go again. Life is not meant to be comfortable all the time.
DENISE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And leadership is not comfortable.
DENISE: It isn’t.
MURIEL WILKINS: The issue is when we exacerbate the discomfort. So, it’s really about, how do you navigate leadership that is uncomfortable with as much ease as possible? So, where we have to start with is the way in which you’re even just thinking about your situation. I feel almost like you’ve taken what could be a pretty simple recipe. I’m a big fan of the just like four step recipes, 30 minutes or less. Then you’ve added on like all these additional components, that then, when you see all the additional components, you’re like, “Ah, I don’t know if I could ever do this. What’s going on? It’s become more overwhelming and more than what I expected and I don’t think I can live up.” Then it puts you in this spiral. I think the first thing is, what expectations are you placing on yourself that are grounded in reality rather than the narrative that you have used, what sounds like, for a very, very long time. What do you think it means to be successful in your role today?
DENISE: Being able to successfully lead the team, have a team that feels that they are in a safe environment, that we can talk about our challenges, seeing the team grow. Seeing the leaders within the team grow and the individual contributors, seeing them being able to feel that they’re on a team, that they can share their ideas and we can continue to innovate and continue to make an impact to the program. That is what I identify as being successful in this role for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: To what extent do you feel what you are working on? Like, when you look the things that fill up your calendar and where you’re focusing your energy, is it in support of the things that you listed around what you feel would make you successful today?
DENISE: I would say maybe 30 percent, the rest is just noise. Within the last two weeks, I’ve been purposely looking at my calendar and saying, how am I contributing in these meetings to kind of get myself in a good head space. Yeah, a lot of it is just things that are transactional, but I think my focus has been around, I need to be at these meetings so I can defend what we did. I know they’re going to say things and I need defend.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yep.
DENISE: I need to be there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Don’t worry. I didn’t forget about that word, defend. We needed to get through a couple of other things first before we got there. One is, I want you to start thinking about a lot of your expectations, it sounds like, around what would make you measure up, are based on what you’re thinking others would expect from you. When I asked you, what do you expect from yourself? That’s what I’m trying to get at, is like, well, what do you expect from you? Because what others expect from you, yes, it’s important. But there’s a difference between what they think is worthy and what you define as your internal worth. Whenever I hear somebody say, I’m not good enough, it’s their own self-reflection around their worth and their value for that role, that position, where they’re sitting at the table, wherever it might be. If you can’t get ahold of that, and I asked you, do you believe you’re good enough for the role? And you said, I think you said, not today. If you can’t believe you’re good enough for the role, then why should anybody else believe you’re good enough for the role? I mean, every and then, you’ll find other people who, it sounds like your prior boss, will champion you and see more in you than you might see in yourself, but it sounds to me like when they made you that offer back, then you didn’t have any doubt. It’s when you got into the situation and you realized not everybody else is behaving with me in the same way. So, it must mean somehow I’m wrong.
DENISE: That’s exactly it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You can’t swing like that. Either you believe you’re good enough for the role or you don’t believe you’re good enough for the role. Let’s even just take the word, role, out of it. Either you believe you’re good enough or you don’t believe you’re good enough. Which one is it? But the exhaustion comes from going back and forth, hour to hour, meeting to meeting, day-to-day. One day I’m good enough. One day I’m not. One day I am, one day I’m not. It is exhausting. I’m not trying to make light of it. At some point, the part you can control is deciding, no matter what happens, whether I deliver on this meeting or whether I wore the right clothes when I was a kid, am I good enough? And that’s your starting point.
MURIEL WILKINS: What Denise is experiencing is pretty common for a lot of managers. They say they want to focus on the team, but get caught up in a lot of noise, and in her case, the belief that she’s not good enough. It’s helpful to have people realize that they’ve tackled hard challenges before and can do it again. But for Denise, to fully believe that she could do this role, we need to face her feelings of defensiveness head on. So, I was curious, what exactly is she defending?
DENISE: I feel that I’m defending the work that was done, that brought them to our organization, right? We built something within the last five or six years that was actually ended up being sold to a company. And they’re coming in as if everything is broken and they’re there to save the day. We have an internal joke for those that have been there, like the Christopher Columbus analogy where, oh, I’ve discovered it all. It’s like, no, we made a conscious decision not to do that. I always feel like I have to ground them as to why we did what we did when they’re making a lot of these remarks around whether something’s done right, should it have been done? Is it the right thing? Or I can’t believe we don’t have this already. Then they’re comparing to where they came from, which has done this for X amount of years, that’s what I’m defending. I feel like my blood, sweat and tears are tied to that work that they’re saying is basically nothing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Are you defending the work or are you defending you?
DENISE: I feel like I’m defending the work. I mean, I certainly wasn’t the only one that got us to this place. I mean, we had a team of people, but when I’m in that room and I’m the only one, I’m the only historian in that group, I feel like I’m defending that team that said, “No, we spent a lot of time making this to what you see today, which was attractive enough to be bought.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what makes you, who labeled you, who gave you, tasked you, ordained you as the historian?
DENISE: I self-nominated myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: You appointed yourself. You self-nominated yourself. All right. And the Oscar goes to?
DENISE: Yours truly because I am going to make sure that there’s justice.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Interesting. Okay. It sounds like, in you self-nominating yourself to be the chief historian officer in these meetings, that you see your role as holding the and, right? Like let’s make sure we understand and acknowledge what has happened in the past so that it can inform what we do in the future.
DENISE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah?
DENISE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: The part that seems to be missing for you is it doesn’t feel like anyone wants to acknowledge the past. And you interpret them, not wanting to acknowledge the past, we’ve already touched on this, but you interpret it as, because they don’t think it was good, and therefore it means that we failed.
DENISE: Well when you say like that, Muriel, it makes all the sense in the world.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I’m just throwing it out there.
DENISE: You nailed it. That’s it. That is it. That is it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
DENISE: That is absolutely it. It’s because they miss it. That’s how I feel. That’s how I interpret it. They dismiss the past, that they don’t give homage to those people that made it to what it is. That, for me, feels … It’s sad to me because I know how much work was put into it.
MURIEL WILKINS: What does that then stop you from doing, because you’re not getting the acknowledgement, what does that then stop you from doing?
DENISE: It stops me from focusing on, first of all, what I should be focusing on. So, it stops me from working on getting grounded on my team. Because I have two new areas that I didn’t have before, so getting grounded on those areas, because I want to be at these meetings that they’re at to make sure that they are considering the past. I felt like I’ve created this … I’m chasing to make sure that everybody knows that, hey, we did this in the past and I know that, even if there’s other people that have been there in the past, there’s certain people that I know they won’t say anything. They’re just like, think what you want, it is what it is, let’s keep moving forward. If we get the same barriers, then we’ll say, okay, now let’s change gears, where I’m like, no, no, no, tell them all the stuff we did. So, it takes me away from my work, from what I should be doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m not a huge, huge, I’m going to be vulnerable here, I don’t know a ton about like sports. I mean, I’m sort of a spectator. I watch stuff, but I know that in sports, you have a defensive strategy and you have an offensive strategy. It’s helpful, when you’re com heating, it’s helpful to be able to play both. So, you’ve articulated what your defensive strategy is. What does it look like when you have an offensive strategy?
DENISE: I have no idea. When I think about that question, I’m going to put myself in the space that I’m most comfortable with. I have of my oldest team that I’ve had since the beginning. When I’m with them, I am asking more questions of them than they are of me, and that’s where I feel the most effective. Because I’m not focusing on me telling them what to do or what they need to watch out for. I feel like I’m asking them questions so they can come with new ideas or arrive at the same place. Let’s say if I’m at or make me see something differently. That’s when I feel my ultimate best, is being able to be inquisitive, be curious with wanting to really understand how they see things. That to me is my not being on defense. It’s me just being able to share with them. I don’t even hardly share with what I think in the beginning. Most times, I just let them arrive and I ask questions to have them arrive to that place, and that’s where I feel that I’m playing offense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. Got it. How does that translate to your current situation with your peers now when you’re in these meetings?
DENISE: I think what I can do differently right now is ask them questions to make sure that they’ve covered all their bases that touch on the history of how, whatever they’re working on, is where it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you are articulated role as historian, you made it quite clear, it was to acknowledge what we’ve done, which is the past, so that it could inform the future. My question to you, in the way that you’ve described what you’ve done in terms of explaining and what you could do in terms of asking the questions so that they can acknowledge the past, that sort of takes care of one half of the equation. I’m curious, what do you think you could do to do the other half of the equation, which is to push the conversations more towards the future?
DENISE: The only way I can think of it is just asking questions, to push the conversation towards … With asking questions to understand where they’re trying to take the organization. What do they think it’s going to … How do you think this is going to position us in the market? For example. Asking questions like that, I think, would be less exhausting. I need to turn off in my mind, as we’re having this conversation, turning off this burden I’ve placed on myself to be the historian and just focus on, well, where do you want to take this? And where do you think it’s going to take us? And how is it different in the market? Like I would do with the team that I’ve had for the longest, because they can also teach me things that I had not thought of, or we had not brought in for whatever reason, but they can have a better mouse trap that we had not thought of. I think that is a definite change that I can make.
MURIEL WILKINS: You did give yourself the esteemed role of the historian, and if you were to rename what your role could be that you think would allow you to both leverage the past, but also be future oriented with the changes that are happening and with this team, what role do you think you would self-nominate yourself for?
DENISE: The collaborator.
MURIEL WILKINS: The collaborator. The collaborator. Okay. What would a collaborator Oscar worthy?
DENISE: It’s How the collaborator influences and being able to lift these other people that I’ve come into a space, which is brand new for them to say, I’m going to help you get your ideas into this organization. I’m going to help you drive what you’re trying to do, and I’m going to advocate for you, and I’m going to help you get there because of my experience of me being that historian. But the questions I ask, the things I provide, the support I provide is going to help you elevate your ideas.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think this is your assignment. And I don’t know. I never really know how these things are going to turn out, but what I would encourage you to do is make a commitment that for the next couple of meetings that you have, the next week, the next two weeks, make a commitment that you’re going to walk in as the collaborator, and prepare for the meetings as the collaborator. Ask yourself, what does that look like when I’m in the meetings? What questions am I asking? It doesn’t mean you forget the past, just how do I use the past to help collaborate with these folks? I also think it’s important to understand that what you have to offer falls on a continuum. Is there a possibility, where instead of just playing the role that you have in the past, which is in that beginning of that continuum, just the explaining, you expanded, as you just said, to asking the questions, which leverages a strength of yours, but that you expanded even more to, well, what’s your point of view? What do you think we should be doing?
DENISE: That would absolutely be me. I’m replaying some of the meetings I’ve been in recently and thought, wow, that approach, that meeting would’ve been completely different. And instead, we spent a lot of time explaining and digging into the why we did it and we really made no progress.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what we’re looking here for is for you to tap into several leadership muscles rather than just one. What’s your reaction to that?
DENISE: I think it’s great. I had never thought of it that way, and so I had two speeds. Either I’m defending or I’m silent, or I’m processing.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is so important and you probably hear me say it on every coaching meeting that I have, but the minute we attach ourselves so strongly to one role, one identity, it automatically can create without us even knowing this fear of who am I without that role. So, it does push us into this like, let me defend it, because it’s the only thing that shows that I’m worthy. This notion of, am I relevant? Am I value? Am I worthy? You find it from your ability to realize you are many things. You are not just, just, and I’m quoting, “just the historian.” You are so much more than that. I think a part of this is recognizing in yourself when you’re in those moments where … You mentioned your heart gets tight, like you feel your body like …
DENISE: Physically, I feel things happening.
MURIEL WILKINS: Physically, you feel it. That is your body telling you, hello, Denise. What are you doing? You’re about to go in that place that does not allow you to put your best foot forward. So, listen to it. And you have a choice in that moment. I can constrict to this little box that I’ve put myself in as the historian. Or I can be expansive and say, I have many different gears that I can shift to in this given situation right now. I don’t know about yesterday, I don’t know about tomorrow, but in this given situation, I have range. I have range. I believe and understand that I can add value along that whole continuum. You get what I’m saying?
DENISE: Absolutely. I think I wanted to also make sure and point out, I didn’t want to believe my own BS. I’m also like, I like to check myself to say, are you the only one that thinks you’re fabulous or is everyone like, are we on the same page here? Are we on the same level? It’s amazing because again, I don’t want to think too much of myself. I like being a learning leader, and I’m really proud of that, that I want to learn more, I want to learn how to do things differently. Things change. But this here, it was so spot on, and you also helped make connections.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, good. Good. If you’re gonna check your BS, check all of it. Don’t just check yourself against the like, am I fabulous? Check yourself around the like, okay, am I holding myself back here? Don’t be selective about the BS.
DENISE: That could be a t-shirt, Muriel. That could be a t-shirt. Don’t be selective about your BS.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s interesting, because a lot of time in my coaching, I hear many people on the other side, peers who are complaining that they wish someone could stop talking about what they’ve done in the past. This is the flip side. They’re act really three aspects of leadership Denise wants to activate here. She is the historian, she has the institutional knowledge, and that’s a strength, but she also identified a desire to be a collaborator. Finally, she can work more on her ability to be strategic and visionary, to set direction. What this situation calls her to do is to work on all three of those aspects of the leadership at once and not tie herself so deeply to the role she self-nominated her way into. It means shifting from a defense position to one where she leans into helping the organization move forward. This will require her to be more expansive in her leadership approach, something that it looks like she is ready to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you, and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter @MurielMWilkins, or on Instagram @coachmurielwilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 5: Getting the Leadership Respect I Deserve
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I am a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest who we’ll call “Celina” is a senior-level executive who is between jobs after negotiating a post-merger buyout from her last company. She’s in the midst of weighing different options for her next career move. And in the process she reflects on some of the challenges she faced in her previous leadership role.
CELINA: The role that I had was I was the executive vice president for external affairs and I called myself the executive in charge of relationships. I enjoyed being the person who built relationships for the organization internally and externally. And the challenge that I have is in doing that and in helping an organization be more proximate and helping people understand how to engage and talk and build bridges that it is somehow looked upon in a diminished, lower importance than some of the things that create revenue.
MURIEL WILKINS: This played out in a number of ways in her last position she says. She recalls a specific interaction with one of her colleagues.
CELINA: The most direct incident was a colleague up here. He was on the executive management team. He literally told me in a meeting that I wasn’t an executive. I spent too much time managing my people and I wasn’t an executive. The other executive managers were at the table and everybody was aghast, and I saw my CEO about to say something and I literally put my hand up and said, “No, I got this.” But to be honest, it was really a shock and surprise. It’s always stuck in my head and it gnaws at you.
MURIEL WILKINS: So here’s the issue as I saw it going into our session, Celina never quite felt valued in her last organization, and she doesn’t want a repeat of this experience when she moves into her new leadership role, that feeling of not being valued and not being seen as the executive that she is. And the question is, how does Celina prevent this from happening in the future? How does she set herself up for success in her next role? We pick up the coaching session by better understanding Celina’s leadership approach in the past. Why don’t we just start with your past position. Talk to me a little bit about before the merger and before you left, what kind of leadership style or what kind of style did you have?
CELINA: So in my former role, I was the individual that everybody came to for advice and counsel. I was the connector of the varying personalities. I was the keeper of information. And so it played out that I was the caretaker of concerns, the mediator, the arbitrator sometimes, and the connector. And that was valued, but at the same time, it meant that the business aspect of what we were doing sometimes actually got lost. The challenge became when my work on my team wasn’t actually meeting some of the expectation because I had to spend a lot of time both being all of those other things with colleagues, fixing things in their space, and also spending a lot of time with my very young team that needed my time. So it was a struggle and when my team wasn’t performing and the results were not quite what they needed to be, it began to distract and detract from maybe not the value, but the esteem or the level of respect, if you will, that some of my colleagues had.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, what I’m hearing from you is it felt like the trade-off that you made was in the “respectability” or feeling of respect that you got from the rest of the executive. Was it from the rest of the executive team that you felt that?
CELINA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And so talk to me a little bit about that. How do you know that you didn’t have the respect that you wanted or needed? And actually we should talk about that like what is the respect that you wanted, but we’ll get there, but tell me how you knew.
CELINA: So there are a few levels. Some of it might be internal things that I carry. One, because I’ve had an occasion in a prior role where a colleague describe the work that I and my team did as, “Well, you’re the chairs and tables people, you’re just the events people.” And then fundamentally the lack of excitement and engagement around it and the fact that I know how I make time for people when they need me. Having to fight to get time and attention, when in fact I drop what I’m doing if I need to respond to my peers. And so not being able to get folks on the phone, not being able to get responses, if you will, in a timely fashion, you can feel it. They don’t have to say it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it sounds like them not giving you the time that you requested, not being responsive, and then the potential, what seemed like lack of engagement on their end translated to you as I’m not being respected for what I’m bringing to the table.
CELINA: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? What’s the so what out of that? What did that make you feel or do or what does that mean?
CELINA: It makes me take a step back and reassess the work and again, what is the value of the work? So one, I reduce some of my investment frankly, because if I am seeing, feeling, experiencing that this is not something that is rising to the level of importance, then I need to make certain that that is the right investment of time, both from my standpoint, my team standpoint, and the organization’s standpoint. And so the part for me is taking the step back to say, “Well, maybe it’s not as important as I think it is,” or, “Maybe I need to think about how I present this differently so that it is viewed as valuable as I believe it to be,” because I’m advising you that this is, that’s my job, is to advise you what we need to do to ensure that we are making connections, that we’re getting partnerships, that we are making all of this work such that it has an impact, a positive impact on the business, that there is an ROI.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so I’m going to ask you to hold onto that because I think that that’s something that whatever new role you’re going to go into, that is something that you’re going to want to capture right? How do you demonstrate the ROI? It doesn’t matter if you are the person who fills the coffee pot every morning. How does that in some form or fashion have a line to the overall objective and mission of the organization? Whether you want to use the word ROI or a root cause of the success, you want to hold onto that. So let’s hold onto that in a very tangible way. But I want to go back to something that you said because I asked you what the impact of what you experienced was. And you said it made you question the work and the value of the work. And yet when you described all of the feelings that you had, they seemed as though they were questioning the value of you in the role of delivering the work. And so there’s a difference there. When you face those experiences, and it feels like you faced them a number of times when you were seen as the “chair and table, the chairs in the table,” which by the way, chairs and tables are very valuable. I’m sitting on one right now. I would be very uncomfortable if I did not have one. So let’s not underestimate them. That said, when you experienced that, what did it say about you as a person?
CELINA: That I didn’t deserve a seat at that table, that what I am responsible for is not at the level of everybody else. And I felt it internally. I internalized the disappointment of when you’re not valuing other people. Because that part of me that’s the nurture is I’ve taken the time to care about what people think, what they need, what they know, what they need to know, what they want. And I’m bringing and bridging it all together.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I think there is the intersection where the very thing that you bring, the very thing that you value in you when you kind of pride yourself on, which is nurturing and helping and supporting, is feeling underappreciated. And so then the question becomes, well, if that’s not good enough, that’s who I am, then what does that mean about me? Okay, let’s step back for a moment. This is a critical point of our coaching conversation because up until now, Celina was confronting this issue as a tactical one, basically as how should she communicate her value and return on investment? And while that’s important and we’ll get there, it’s clear to me that a big piece of what’s at play here is what’s underneath the surface. And not being said, that what she’s experienced made her question her value, not only as a leader, but as a person that shook her confidence, a confidence she needs to regain before stepping into her next role. Okay. Back to the conversation. We always think about leverage your strengths, leverage your strengths, leverage your strengths. And that’s true. And at the same time, it’s understanding that sometimes we have to expand what our strengths are and actually discover new ones that we might not have used in the past. You said a little bit while back, “Maybe it’s in the way that I communicated or shared the purpose of the work that I did, was I able to demonstrate an ROI?” Well, that takes a whole different skill set to be able to do that that is separate and apart, related, but apart from this nurturing, supportive, high emotional intelligence type of skill. So the two are not mutually exclusive, but what it does say is are there other skills that I can bring to the table? And so if we sort of go back a little bit more in those moments of when you were feeling underappreciated or the work that you were doing, taking it back to the work piece, the work you were doing was not valued, what state and ground did you put then, what did you ask for to be able to move the work forward in the way that you felt you needed to?
CELINA: I asked for clarity on what some of the goals were. And so that’s part of what the challenge was, was also helping my peers understand these are the expectations your people have. I know what your expectations are goal wise, let’s meet in the middle and come up with the top five, and now I need you to go communicate back to your folks and help them understand when we say no, that we can’t do these things.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so if you think about the amount of help that you asked for and the amount of help that was offered, how much of it did you actually take?
CELINA: I want to say I took most of it with the exception of there were maybe one, two instances where I felt when I was offered assistance that it was to rescue me, to basically say, “We don’t think you can do this. Let me help you out.” And I said, “No, I got it.” There’s a line where you could want your peers’ help, but you want to be able to do what is within your responsibility to do. And sometimes those offers of help were not offers that I wanted to take up because it in some way, shape, or form would mean that I couldn’t handle my team.
MURIEL WILKINS: This feeling of being rescued is really all in our head. I mean, what’s the difference between somebody asking to help and somebody being rescued is how whatever story you want to place on top of it, whatever fairy tale you want to use. Am I being rescued or am I being whisked off my feet? I don’t know. And I think it’s in the way that you respond to it. So with that particular colleague, if we were to again go back in time, one alternative is to say, “Fine, you do it,” which feels to you like you’re just scumming and giving up. The other alternative say, “No, I’ll do it right,” and therefore I can do it and I show that I’m adding value. And then there’s something in between, not even something, there are many things in between in which one of them is, “Thank you very much, here’s what you can do.” So I just want to make sure you’re sort of thinking of the gradients in between when you are reacting particularly to support that is being given to you because you’re very used to being the giver of support. And I just wonder how comfortable it is for you to be the receiver of support.
CELINA: Very good.
MURIEL WILKINS: So explain that pause for me. What’s going through your head right now?
CELINA: I don’t receive very well. Receive in the sense of I am hard to give things to. It’s like I feel like I can do it myself. I can get it done. I am grateful for the help. I don’t want you to be put out. So it’s not from the standpoint of I can’t use the help, it’s just I don’t want anybody to go through the trouble. And unfortunately as I’m listening to myself, I hear giving in the context of somebody who’s doing work when in fact I want people to just receive what I am trying to provide. So I make it hard for people to give things to me. How about that?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean it’s kind of like you’re resisting the very thing that you’re putting out. So in essence, you are rejecting the value that you bring to the table when it’s being given to you and yet expecting others to really value what you bring to the table. I just want you to sit with that.
CELINA: Clearly I don’t have words.
MURIEL WILKINS: Wow. The way that you value, you fully value who you are is not only value it in yourself, value in giving it to others, but also being able to receive it back. At this point in the coaching meeting, Celina has deconstructed her situation quite a bit and faced her truth about what kept her stuck in this place of not feeling valued. Now she’s ready to look forward and focus on what she can do that’s within her control that will help her feel like she has and deserves her seat at the table when she moves into her new role. I think that what you’re going to try to aim for, what I’d suggest you aim for is what I call the value intersection. And it’s an intersection of three things. The first piece is what’s the value that you bring to the, and having a clear definition because they don’t know right? You’re walking, yeah, they interviewed you, they’ve seen your resume, all the great recruiting stuff, but they don’t really know. So you have to define what that value is and be able to articulate it in a really clear way. The second is the value that the organization needs. And then the third is what do your stakeholders need, whether that’s the rest of the executive management team, your boss, the customers, if you’re dealing with customers, et cetera. And the intersection between those three things is that value intersection where there’s that nice convergence of what you bring to the table, what the organization needs and what stakeholder need and value as well. Without that, you potentially have three diverging forces which end up making your job a lot harder.
CELINA: Infinitely harder.
MURIEL WILKINS: Infinitely harder. And so are you going to have that figured out on day one? Probably not. If you do call me, because then I can do a case study on you. But should you start thinking about it before day one? Absolutely. My guess is that what’s happened in the past for you is that either there was lack of clarity around what that intersection was or there was dissonance between those three circles.
CELINA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’ll tell you that in communicating what the value that a person or a division or function or whatever brings to anyone or to an organization, on the receiver end, one of the easiest ways to be able to fully understand it is in the language of results right? Here’s where I’m going to take you. Here are the results that I can drive to. Here’s how we drive to those results right?
CELINA: Totally fair. Totally right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So in terms of your onboarding into your new role, defining the value, and then moving it to how do you communicate it in a way that’s relevant to the organization and to stakeholders and in a very concrete way in the language of results is something that will really help on the outset because if not, then it just stays in the nice esoteric language of we think you’re great, but there’s always underlying that, what are you going to do?
CELINA: What are you going to do? How’s it going to affect the bottom line? Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. At some point when that’s not answered, then it’s left up to interpretation of what are you going to do. And that’s when all those stories start coming like, “Oh, are you just chairs and table?” But I also want to talk about this aspect of what support you feel you’ll need. And we’re talking here conceptually because you don’t have the role, but when you think about how do you know if you have the right support, what are some of the types of things that you ought to look for?
CELINA: Again, the executive leadership belief, value, support in terms of the work, making certain that there’s a team or the ability to build an effective team, that is going to be very important in terms of the resources. Now recognizing you can’t ask for resources on the outset, but understanding what’s in place is going to be really critically important and being able to leverage others, and that’s where that buy-in and that sponsorship comes from others is really vitally important.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. Although I’m going to push back a little bit. I think part of your vetting process is looking at the resources and understanding where are you going to have some flexibility there and bandwidth to ask right from the outset. I mean, if you are interviewing for a role and you already see that the team is extremely lean, and yet where the organization wants to go is 10 times where it is now, certainly valid to ask. One of the things that I’m picking up a little bit on is you walking in the door recognizing that you are an executive, and as an executive, it is the course of business to both give and also receive. So I think a big piece for you is being able to inventory what you’re going to need beyond support, beyond the, “We got your back,” in real tactical terms, whether it’s a stronger team, whether it’s financial resources, whether it’s time with your boss or with others, whatever that might be. But really make that inventory early on because you have a window of time where those requests are actually aren’t as bad. Once you’re seen as comfortable being able to operate without the resources, it’s actually a lot harder to go ask.
CELINA: Been there, done that many times.
MURIEL WILKINS: You do want to take inventory realistically early on so that it can also help you prioritize right? I mean, at the end of the day, the tension in running an organization is you have finite resources and the possibility of unlimited expectations. And so something has to give, and that’s the tension, the beautiful tension of being a leader is that you’re constantly managing both. And I just want to pause before we close. What are your key takeaways? What are you leaving this conversation with differently than how you walked in around what you think, what you feel, and what you will do?
CELINA: I came into the conversation looking for help to define my value, and I feel like I have additional tools to help refine and hone that for myself. And then putting all of that into a concise narrative and also working on myself a little bit more around the giving piece and being able to receive. There was a long pause after you pulled that one out, and that’s one I really want to reflect more on. That was really compelling. And I’m just going to say it was actually quite hard. And while you were saying it or before you got to it, I had that realization, “Oh, this is where I’m going to?” I was like, “Oh [inaudible 00:24:56]. She got me.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, you got you. I didn’t get you. You got you. You got you.
CELINA: So yeah, this is really helpful and I have a bit of homework to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: We all do. We all do. So this is the end of our coaching meeting, but where the real work starts for Celina. She came to the realization that defining her value is not just an external exercise of how she voices her value to others, but it’s also an internal exercise of what she voices to herself about her value. It clicked for her. And this whole notion of thinking about your value is really transferable no matter where you are in your career. Asking yourself what’s the value you’re bringing to the table at your organization and how are you demonstrating it to your stakeholders and how are you demonstrating it to yourself? And finally, how do you feel about your value? Because how Celina answers those questions will show whether she’s truly moved the needle in her next role. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
SPEAKER 1: It’s try to figure out better alignment on where I want to go in my career and what is really the next step to help me achieve my long-term careers. And if I was looking at a year, I want to be in a role that’s helping me develop the skillsets and opportunities that will allow me to get to where I want to go long run.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sánchez, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 6: Where Are They Now?: Checking in with Guests from Season 1
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins. And this is
Coaching Real Leaders
. Part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. So I never quite know what happens once our coaching conversation ends. And like many of you, I’m curious. So today we’re checking in with a few guests from season one of
Coaching Real Leaders
, to see what they did after our coaching meeting and to see where they are today. Let’s start with “Daniella,” who was my guest on season one’s episode, “Finding My Leadership Voice.” I heard from many of you that this episode really resonated with you. If you recall, “Danielle” was having a hard time feeling like her presence wasn’t enough to show that she was a strong leader. Here’s some of what she shared back then.
DANIELLA (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 10): It’s got to do with imposter syndrome, some confidence issues, and also the way I’m very aware these days of my communication shortfalls, the way I come across and sometimes not always, but sometimes I fail to influence others the way that I wish I could influence them. It’s something that might be holding me back. The reason why I want to overcome that is because I want to continue to be taken seriously by my peers and superiors to a point where if an opportunity opens up for a higher level, I want to be considered a real contender for it. I guess there’s some things in my communication style that don’t accurately reflect the strong leader that I am on the inside.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I wondered where was “Daniella” now? Had she worked on her communication style? Did she feel more confident? When we recently checked in with her here’s what she had to say in terms of what she had picked up from the coaching meeting and what actions she’d taken since then.
DANIELLA: Before I go into every meeting, it was calm, confident, and credible. And I actually have it on a little Post-it Note right in front of my laptop so that I can remind myself, yep, let me do a little bit of mental conditioning so that I can appear calm, confident, and credible. And it has helped quite a bit. And not only with my meetings with clients where I do a little bit of mental conditioning, I make sure that my body’s relaxed. I make sure that I’m being set up for success before the meeting and then the confidence and the calm kind of carries in my voice as I’m speaking. And I’ve been able to improve my relationship with my clients. And I feel like I’m in a really good spot right now where my client really trusts me. So I come across as like somebody that knows her stuff and can kind of point you in the right direction. And that has happened in a couple of different forums.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s great is that coming out of the coaching session, “Daniella” remembered small, actionable steps she could implement to help improve her leadership presence. And she started to think differently about herself and values she brings to the table.
DANIELLA: I think before I talked to Muriel, I wasn’t as self-aware about my body and my mental state. I was just kind of floating from meeting to meeting, not really thinking about how do I want to come across? How am I feeling? What can I do to make myself more successful? And then Muriel lit up that idea in my head that wait, there is something I can do before I go into a meeting to prepare myself better, to set myself up for success. So just taking literally like 20 seconds before the meeting. And then I take some deep breaths. Actually have a little mantra for myself. It’s like, you’ve got this. I have to remind myself of that when I go into these interactions. That I’m there for a reason, I have value and that people are inviting me to these meetings because they know I’m going to contribute. They know I’m going to come to the table with something that adds value. So that’s all different than what I used to think about myself. It’s been an improvement for sure. And I feel the difference in how people react to me. And I feel the difference in myself as well. As a leader, I feel like I’m more unapologetic about myself and the way I come across. I’m more accepting of how I am and more genuine. It’s not that I wasn’t genuine before. I’ve always been pretty genuine. I’m just more true to my core. And I’m a bigger believer in myself and my leadership capabilities.
MURIEL WILKINS: Next up, we checked in with “Ellie.” You might remember her from the season one episode on the brink of burnout. She was struggling a bit in a tech startup world that was demanding a lot of her energy, both physically and emotionally. She was feeling burnt out. But as we dug deeper, “Ellie” realized that her feelings of not being good enough was significantly contributing to her burnout. Here’s a bit of our exchange from that episode.
MURIEL WILKINS (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): Now, I don’t want you to tell me what you would expect. I really want you for five minutes, just humor me. Right. Make believe I’m that friend. What are you going to tell me? I messed up. I feel like I messed up. I’m supposed to do this project. It’s highly valued for the company. And my boss basically said, he’s not happy with the way it’s going. Now he tried to like, make me feel okay about it and make it feel like it’s not about me, but I know he’s annoyed. And I feel terrible about it. Like I just, I don’t know if this is for me anymore.
ELLIE (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): I am everyone’s biggest champion. So I would, and I might get emotional because I realize how stupid that sounds, but.
MURIEL WILKINS (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): It’s okay. It’s not stupid. It’s real.
ELLIE (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): It’s yeah, I would say that get out of your head. I think you just need to pivot a little bit to understand what they’re asking for. It sounds like you’re on the right track, but you’re just getting distracted, I think. And he’s giving you the opportunity to get back on track.
MURIEL WILKINS (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): Yeah.
ELLIE (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): So don’t take it so personally.
MURIEL WILKINS (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): I mean, I can’t even say it to you any better, to be honest. I can’t.
ELLIE (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 4): I think a big part of problem is that in my personal life, that those seeds of doubt actually do come from my parents. Oh, this is going to be like a counseling session. So it doesn’t matter if the whole world tells me I’m good enough or that I’m great at what I do. I always have that voice in the back of my head that says, yeah, but you didn’t do this that I wanted you to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: That was definitely an aha moment of self-awareness for “Ellie.” And I wondered where she went from there. When we caught up with “Ellie,” she shared the many moves she has taken coming out of that conversation. All of which ultimately led her to join a different company, more aligned with what she wanted. Here’s what she did after the coaching.
ELLIE: One of the biggest areas we talked about was needing to extend empathy to myself. And I did get emotional in the podcast. So I did come to a realization that I need some help in that area. Muriel did kind of say like, I’m not a therapist. So I’m like, okay, I think I do essentially need that. So that’s been good. Next, she talked a lot about how there was some areas in leadership that I was okay with, but the real challenge for me was scaling leadership up and creating boundaries. So I did put quite significant effort into those areas, which is actually like how a lot of the issues of why this wasn’t good fit got fleshed out. There was this talk of having to talk about what do I actually want and facing the reality of that, which keyed into those earlier points as I started to realize, okay, I actually just don’t think this role is for me.
ELLIE: I think I’m doing it because it’s an opportunity for me to grow. And while it was a good opportunity, I think I learned enough. I think I learned enough about leadership to know that, yeah, this is still something I want, but not in this situation. So I started to realize that things that were important to me were actually not as important to this company, as I thought it was. So I started to realize like, okay, this is where the friction is coming from where I want to prioritize certain things that they probably don’t want me to prioritize on.
ELLIE: Next thing I learned is that I don’t need to rush into leadership. This needing to like, okay, I need to step back and just like, not chase this carrot. And then lastly, I want to go back to doing stuff I enjoy, which is more technical work, which I did talk to Muriel about as well in the podcast, is that I was losing the technical and I was not feeling good about it. I had said to Muriel that like, oh, I think I’m a great leader because I get things done. And while that’s true, I didn’t feel good about it. I needed there to be a lot of emphasis on morale and treating the team equally and giving them work life balance. I have a lot more confidence now in the type of leader that I am. And it’s very clear to me I need to work for an organization that will support that instead.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Ellie” clearly did the work by seeking professional support to explore the roots of her internal saboteur, by creating boundaries, and by joining a company that is more aligned with what she wants. In effect, “Ellie” took control of her situation rather than letting the situation control her as she had done in the past. And in the process, she became much clearer about the kind of leader she is rather than the kind of leader she thought she was supposed to be. And finally, we heard from “Diane,” who I spoke to early last season with the issue of running a nonprofit team and there being tension between the people she managed and the leader of the organization. It was the episode called caught in the middle. Here’s what she shared on that episode about the challenge she was facing.
DIANE (TAPE FROM SEASON 1 EPISODE 2): Where I’m incredibly challenged right now is that because I have built an organization where everybody’s voice counts and everybody needs to sort of speak their mind and is encouraged to share how they’re feeling and what they’re experiencing. We’re currently in this very uncomfortable position where my team is having issues with the founder who is a very, very wealthy white man. It’s very challenging. And as somebody who’s always considered herself very, very good at navigating this particular challenge, I am struggling right now with how to get them to all feel safe talking to one another so that we can move our organization forward. Because this right now feels like we’re just, we’re weighing ourselves down. We have to build a healthier team and we have to have a team that is communicating with one another and not through me as the middle person.
MURIEL WILKINS: I was eager to hear how “Diane” was doing and whether there had been much improvement with her team since we spoke about this issue. And I wanted to know what she focused on after our coaching meeting.
DIANE: I think that what I most remember was this notion of being a catalyst, not being a responsible party for everything. And I think that I’ve really had a lot of growth in that area. It was a little rocky at first because it was tough for my team to shift with me as I was trying to do the shift. And I certainly had to sort of learn and grow into that. But once we figured that out, I would say we’re in the best place we’ve ever been. And so much of that is because I’ve changed how I see myself as the leader in our organization. I think about myself differently now as a leader who wants to bring her team along with her and who is comfortable placing responsibility with other team members and playing more of a supporting role.
DIANE: So I think in that sense, I’m a more confident leader because in the past I would’ve had to have everything sort of sit with me in order for me to feel like it was being dealt with and in control, but my team and I have developed this level of trust right now that’s really wonderful in that I can truly trust that they’re doing things with the outcome in mind that I hope that they will, and it doesn’t have to be the way that I would have done it. And I think Muriel and I talked a lot about the race component of my team and the interracial dynamics in those relationships. And we’ve had so much improvement in that area, just with people being able to talk to one another and for me to step out of the way so I’m not sandwiched between all the part and I can help people help themselves and help people have the conversations themselves, which is really empowering for everyone.
DIANE: It was not easy to implement this stuff right away. I very clearly remember this one conversation I had in a supervision with one of my employees where I was trying to implement it. And I just, I honestly like, there’s no better way of saying that I fell flat on my face trying to do this. I mean, it was a disaster trying to implement this, but that was an awesome learning experience because I had to end that conversation and just sort of say like, wow, where did that go wrong? Like that clearly went really wrong. Where did that go wrong? And how can I learn from this and do better next time? And I did. And thankfully, she was forgiving enough to give me the grace to fix it, but it was not a quick and easy fix by any means. I’m in a good place, but there’s always things that I want to work on.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Diane” was able to turn her team environment around, starting with how she thought of her role as a leader. I can appreciate her sharing that the road has not been easy. It never is. But as long as you seek to learn at every twist and turn, you’ll continue to grow as a leader just like Diane.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. I hope you’ve enjoyed catching up with some of our past guests as much as I have. You can hear all of season one and season two on hbr.org or in your favorite podcast app. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 6: Choosing What’s Next for My Career
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a long time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals, and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months; but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting, focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Today’s guest is someone we’ll refer to as Cam, to protect his confidentiality. Cam has had a relatively long career in the military, and when he moved to civilian life to managing large-sized manufacturing plants, he learned how to lead differently, because it was less about the chain of command, and more about getting people on your side. Still, there were some similarities between the two worlds.
CAM: The military is very hierarchal and very, I guess, authoritative, with the way the system works. You could essentially tell somebody to jump, and they would have to say, “How high?” Not literally, but that’s the approach there. Whereas, when I went to a steel plant, it’s a unionized facility, you had to take that into account that if you tell them to jump, they’re not going to say, “How high?” So it requires a different approach to your leadership skills in there.
CAM: So just the way you manage people, the way people react, it’s very different, because this is the real world, as I call it, not the military. For me, have it all as we continuously to teach myself my roles when I stepped in the steel industry, it just allowed me to move from role to role with minimal issues, because I was used to having to teach myself, find the people to connect with, and learn what I needed to do to add value to the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: After many years as the Maintenance Lead in large plants, a role that is literally responsible for keeping the lights on, Cam is ready for something new. He’s left his position at the plant, and is now trying to figure out what’s next; a question that many of us face at some point in our careers.
CAM: I’m hoping to, as I said, I’ve got a bunch of offers that are going to potentially be coming here in the next couple of weeks. And so, it’s trying to figure out, trying to get better alignment on where I want to go in my career, and what is really the next step to help me achieve my longterm careers? And if I was looking at a year, I want to be in a role that’s helping me develop the skills for that, and opportunities that will allow me to get to where I want to go, long run. So I think it’s just trying to figure out where is the best role that helps me achieve what I want to do. And then, over the next year, I’m hoping in a year I’ll be in that role. And be looking hopefully within a corporation, advancing through the operation, up towards my goals.
MURIEL WILKINS: As he considers all of this, he’s wondering, “How does he make sure that in whatever company and role he chooses, he’ll be making the choice that will set him on the path for where he wants to be in the longterm?” Cam wants to know, “What do I do next that will best set me up for the future?” So I started the coaching conversation by learning a bit more about what his career path had been like up until now.
MURIEL WILKINS: While you were in your last company, what was your trajectory like? I know you said you moved around; was it lateral moves? Was it moving up? Or was it all of the above? Kind of share with me a little bit, what your path looked like.
CAM: I would say it was moving up, eventually. The steel industry, they love to lateral you around for 8, 9, 10 years before they move you up. Part of the problem is, I was at a senior manager level at the plant, that for me to move up, there’s only three of those positions in the plant. So you kind of got to wait until somebody moves on. And the individuals in those roles, they typically don’t move on very often. Those roles are far and few in between, which is what’s the tough thing for a lot of people coming into the steel industry, is moving up in the steel industry is very tough. So a sign of them that they like you is, that they move you around. So they start moving you around to other plants. That means you’re on the right career path. It’s just, you got to sometimes wait a long time to get to that next level.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so, you mentioned that it depended on the individuals that you worked with. So what kind of individuals do you tend to like to work with, who are aligned with your style, and where you felt like you could do your best work?
CAM: So I think one of the best individuals I worked with are ones that kind of gave me the independence to do my job. They would say, “Hey, you need to get from A to B, go figure it out.” And they didn’t dictate all the steps: B, C, D, E, F, all the way through. They just said, “Get from point A to point B; here’s what you need to do. And go figure it out.” I really like that independence of being able to get the job done. I feel like I’m at a point in my career that I don’t need to be micromanaged and told how to do all the individual steps. And so those two primary individuals, they just said, “Here’s what you need to do. Go figure it out. And if you need anything, let us know.”
CAM: It’s kind of like we just meshed well, personality, working together. They gave you that opportunity and latitude. And they also gave me the opportunity to add onto my roles and responsibilities, and to pursue things that maybe weren’t part of our core function, and to challenge, I guess, the status quo. But they were also open to doing things differently, and they were actually open to feedback. If I thought things needed to go off in a different direction, or we were doing something wrong, they were also willing to sit down and do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So what I’m hearing is independence to get the work done, and at the same time pushing you; which sort of falls in line with your whole drive for excellence, right? Somebody pushing you to move forward towards that. So you come out of the steel company, and what were you looking for in your next role?
CAM: I was looking for an industry that was a little bit more secure in the long run. I was looking someplace that I wasn’t always trying to survive on a day-to-day basis. I was looking to get into an industry that was ideally, that’s on the cord of change, that’s trying to move things for the better. So I think it’s just view me as more of that general manager type person, that can come in and do about any role within a company, and step in and add value.
CAM: So, what I was leaving out, I was hoping to either get back into their Program Management or Chief of Staff role, just kind of get back to those corporate functions, or even a strategic role in a company is where I wanted to get to. I realize that the Chief of Staff role, and especially the Strategy role are going to be pretty difficult to do, especially with a lot of the pauses in hiring and what people are looking for. It didn’t look like I quite had the skill set, or not everything I needed to do to really line up with those jobs.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you now have a job in hand, right? And so, what is keeping you up at night at this point about taking this offer, and as you think about your career, moving forward?
CAM: It’s definitely going to continue that stereotype of engineering and maintenance. It’s a maintenance function within a plant. So that’s probably my biggest concern there, is that I was trying to break from that mold, and I’m right back there. Moving forward, I going to have to work really hard to get out of that type of role. It’s kind of one of those things is, sometimes you may want to be someplace in your life, but people see you for different values that you bring.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
CAM: It’s a realization that maybe, “This is where I do add value in the corporate world. Maybe this is where I do best.”
MURIEL WILKINS: First of all, help me understand a little bit around when you say you’re seen as the maintenance engineer type; what does a maintenance role look like? I’m not familiar with those functions.
CAM: It’s actually your job is to make sure all the equipment operates when it’s supposed to operate. There’s a lot of technical aspects into it, especially early on in your career. Traditionally, it becomes more about your managerial leadership skills as you move up, because then you have to worry about budget, strategic decisions, depending on what you do in the roles.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what draws you to those types of roles?
CAM: One, it definitely adds a lot more variety into your life. The thing that gets a little bit frustrating, you do a project, and then you repeat the same project over. It’s a very… So for me, it just doesn’t push you intellectually and challenges you a lot, because it’s just the same thing over and over.
MURIEL WILKINS: So how are you feeling about this next role then?
CAM: You know, there’s going to be a lot of learning. So it’ll be different for me, coming into an established place, to bring it to the next level. And I think it’s going to require some strategic settings. So I think it’s… Try to set the strategy for a plant, I think is unique in this. I think I can definitely add value. I don’t see it as something I’m going to be doing for 10 years, at this point. I think it’s more go and add value; do it for a couple of years, and then you move on to another role within the company.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if you were to articulate what your key question is right now, or what the problem is that you’re grappling with, how would you state it?
CAM: Yeah. And I guess it’s when I’m looking out 15 years down the road, or even 10 years now, I guess at this point is, is that, “Where do I want to be in my career?” One of the questions I had somebody ask me recently, “Do you want to be a CEO?” And I’ve also kind of said, “I want to be a CEO. How do you get there?” But then I heavily question, “Is that really a good fit for where I want to be 10, 15 years from now? Or do I want to be in a different role in the function?” So that’s kind of one of the big questions is, “Where do I want to be 15 years down the road? Do I want to be in that CEO role, or do I want to be in a different role within a company?” I think that’s the big question. And then, “How do I get there?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. It’s clear that while Cam is ready to move on to the next chapter, he’s unsure about what it might look like. He feels typecast in the role he’s been in. He feels like he’s not being challenged, and he feels the pull to something more, but has a foggy outlook on what his long-term career goals are. Does he want to one day be a CEO? Or does he want a different type of role in the future? And this adds to his uncertainty on what to do next, because he wants to make sure that whatever he does sets him up for success down the line.
MURIEL WILKINS: The questions churning through Cam’s mind as he weighs his options are common for anyone trying to course a different path for their career. And it can cause a lot of swirl and confusion. So where I thought Cam needed most help right now, was bringing structure to his thinking, breaking down this big question of, “What do I want to do with my life?” that consumes all of us at one point or another, into more manageable chunks. And if we could break it down in a more structured way, maybe he would gain more clarity on what’s next. So we pick the conversation back up with that in mind.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you’ve thought about that question, “Where do I want to be in 10, 15 years?” What comes up for you?
CAM: So for me, it just goes down to personality. What do I like doing on the day-to-day business? And, I think that’s kind of where I look at the Chief of Staff role and the CEO; they compliment each other, but they have two very different, I think, places in the company. The CEO obviously is the face of the company at that point. He’s the guy that’s out in the front; whereas that Chief of Staff role, from what I’ve learned and seen, is they really are the guy that works behind the scenes to get things done.
CAM: Looking back on my life, and some of my favorite positions, that’s what I just do. As my managers have said, “You just get stuff done. We tell you, you go get it done.” Sometimes it’s being the bulldog in the background; and the way you can do that, I think, you get more freedom doing that when you work in the background. You’re not as concerned with the outward politics of it. For me, it’s not about necessarily being recognized and being rewarded upfront. It’s just knowing I did a good job, and having that freedom to get stuff done. I find I work a lot better and I have more energy when I can collaborate and work with people, instead of having to necessarily lead a team of people, and then deal with all the administrative aspects of that. It’s something you got to do. I don’t like necessarily having to do that every day of the week, I guess.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. So it sounds to me like one of the questions that you’re inherently dealing with is, “Do you want to lead as an individual contributor, or do you want to lead in a hierarchical leadership position?” Right? Because there are different ways to lead, right? We use the word lead and automatically assume it’s, you’ve got to be the top person on the pyramid or whatnot. And that’s really from a hierarchical standpoint, versus the skill of leading, which can happen at any level, no matter where you sit in the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, part of what I hear you saying is, on the one hand, what could be an opportunity for 10, 15 years down the line, is for you to lead an overall organization by being the top individual there, or one of the top individuals there. On the other hand, there’s a way of leading in the organization, more in an individual contributor stance, but where you are working through people by influencing, and working with them collaboratively to get things done. Does that make sense?
CAM: Yeah, actually that’s a great way. I’ve never really thought about it that way. But that individual, if I look back at my, I guess 18 years of career history, the roles that I’ve probably thrived the best in have also been in those individual collaborator roles, where I work for other people, work with people, pursuing things, and then, those are the roles I’ve typically enjoyed the best. So, my last company, I spent two years working in an individual contributor role; really enjoyed it, it just kind of came to its natural conclusion. The role was really formed for a specific reason for those two years, and it kind of came to an end. And so I moved out into the plant into that hierarchal manager role in that. I enjoyed it for the year, but there was a role I had to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So part of it is asking yourself, “Which one do you lean towards the most?” And it sounds like from an interest standpoint, in terms of what motivates you, what kind of fires you up, it’s more the sort of activities that you can get done in an individual contributor role, as well as the freedom that it might give you. Right? But as in anything, there are trade-offs. So, if you were to consider more of a people leader role, let’s call it that, versus an individual contributor role; both that are highly impactful, but different, right, different ways of leading. What do you think the trade-offs are that you would be making in one versus the other? If you were to today say, “You know what, I don’t think I’m going to pursue a CEO track.” Is there anything that you feel you would be giving up?
CAM: I guess it’s just kind of like being the, I guess you call it “the top person” in the food chain. I also like being in charge of myself, being able to dictate my day-to-day schedule. And that’s kind of why it’s like you get to be CEO, you’re in charge of everything. You have that responsibility. As I found in those individual, with the right manager and the right location, you don’t necessarily lose that, because I’ve had some roles that are very autonomous, that the only time or reason I talked to my boss is to go catch up and just say, “Hey, how was your weekend?” Not necessarily to check up on my work on a regular basis. So that’s kind of where I’m at. I don’t think I give up much by not being a CEO. And that’s kind of where my mindset is.
CAM: Some days I see besides just being able to say I did it, more than anything, it’s kind of like, “Hey, I’ve only been interested, and then I achieved the pinnacle of what you can in a corporation, by running a company.” But there’s things you give up along that, and being a people leader is not something I’d say, “Hey, I want to be a people leader.” It’s just not, I don’t think my personality meshes well with that; which I think is part of the struggles in the military too, is as an officer, you’re expected to be a people leader. And there’s a lot more stuff that comes along with it that you don’t necessarily are expected to worry about in the business world.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I think the question that I have for you is, “To what extent are you filtering this, ‘Where am I 15 years from now?’ with this notion of, ‘Where can I be in 15 years from now that will support me having an entrepreneurial mindset?'”
CAM: Yeah. This concept of entrepreneurial mindset, I think, is really, for me, has just come up more recently, probably within the last couple of months. I was working with somebody to help me craft my story, my message. Entrepreneurial mindset kind of came up during that discussion. When you say entrepreneurial, I think startups; I think you talk about entrepreneurs out there, and I just never… It did sit comfortably with me, but now, based on the conversation today, and a couple of conversations I’ve had with people recently, it’s now being… It’s kind of starting to accept, “Okay, maybe this is who I am, that I didn’t really necessarily understand.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I think a big piece of the tension that you’re dealing with is, you’re at this place where you are trying to figure out, or you’re feeling, the tension of, “Do I do what seems to be natural for me, that really reflects who I am? Versus, “Do I do what’s expected of me, in terms of the next step?” And I find that many people will face that inflection sometimes at different times in their career. A lot of times they’re not even aware that they’re there, so they just tend to be on autopilot, and continue with what’s expected of them. Right? These are the people who end up one day being CEO, and like, “How the heck did I get here?” Right? “This is never what I wanted.” And then there are those who feel that tension just as you are, and pause and say, “Okay. What do I do? What’s next? Where do I want to be?” I want to just pause, and have you appreciate that, it’s not an easy decision.
MURIEL WILKINS: The other thing that I’m going to note for you is, you tend to focus very much on the activity that you would be involved in, in any of your roles; so what you do. And I understand that, you’re a doer, right? What I’m going to offer you, is that you think about where you want to be in the next 10 years, not just focused on what you would be doing. Okay? I want to sort of raise it up a level. And so, there’s a couple of questions that I think you need to ask yourself. The first is, “What is the impact that you want to make? Regardless of function, job, title, salary; just overall, right, at the end of the day, what’s the purpose behind it?” And it doesn’t have to be a, “I want to save the world purpose.” So when you think about that, what comes up for you?
CAM: Well, it’s kind of, the way I look at it is where I’ve been, I think the impact; one of the big companies I’ve been following, and have been looking at has been SpaceX and Tesla, and some of those companies that are really trying to push change for the society. They’re really trying to do things differently; not about maintaining the status quo in society. And those are just two examples that come through. I can really admiring what they’re trying to do. And for me, I want to be someplace that’s trying to challenge the status quo.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I’m going to ask you to reframe that, and not say, “I want to be someplace that is going to challenge the status quo.” And more, “I want to challenge the status quo.” Because we’re talking about your personal impact here, regardless of where you are. Right?
CAM: So, I want to be challenging the status quo. I’ve obviously done that wherever I’ve been, but I want to do that with the job that I do. I want to be able to challenge the status quo someplace, where we can challenge how things are being done in society, or how are things being done.
MURIEL WILKINS: And to what end, right? Because challenging the status quo can be a sport, and we could go at it all day long, and like, “Let’s just challenge the status quo.” And then there could be challenging the status quo to a certain end.
CAM: For me, it’s just to make life simpler, so we can focus on what matters most in life. So for me, it’s when I go into a role is, “Okay, let’s change these processes, so that we can get back into focusing on what really matters the most.” So in my last role, one of the things is, people would often spend eight hours day in meetings; and a maintenance role, that’s not good, because I need everybody out there turning wrenches, fixing equipment, and focusing on that. So we got up to two days a week, we were not allowed to have any meetings within our department, because I wanted individuals out on the floor, because it mattered more to be out there, than sitting in a meeting. So for me, I want to be able to disrupt technology or do things differently, so that we can really focus on what matters most to us in our lives, or to do things, to make things simpler.
MURIEL WILKINS: Cam really articulate something critical here; his purpose, his north star, his raison d’etre, however you want to call it. And why is this important? Because this whole time, he’s been stuck on what he should do next, without a clear sense of what drives this decision, which is his “why.” This realization can help him frame which role to choose next, and what guides his career decisions moving forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So if we just capture that as a theme, basically, Cam is the guy who pushes and changes the status quo, so that we, the organization, the team, the people, can focus on what matters most. And he does that no matter where he is; it could be, wherever it is; but this is the underlying theme. Does that resonate with you?
CAM: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I want you to hold on to that, because that should be at the top of the pyramid of what then cascades down to help you make decisions around where you want to be 10, 15 years from now, but also where you spend your time, and where you focus in your next role. And as you take on different roles, and even in terms of what you do on a day-to-day basis.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it’s very important that we’re not just driven by doing and activities, but those activities are tied to some type of impact and meaning and purpose, whatever you want to call it, that then gives meaning to those activities. Right? So that’s the first question when you ask yourself, “Where do I want to be 15 years from now?” The first question is, “What type of impact do I want to have?” Okay? And you just defined it.
MURIEL WILKINS: The second question is, “How do you want to work on this impact? How do you want to make it happen?” And this is where we get to this question of, “Do I want to do it more as an individual contributor? Do I want to do it more as the top general manager executive?’ It really is a reflection here of your skills. Okay? And this is where we get into the doing part. How do you want to execute on that impact you want to make? So if, again, the impact is, “I want to challenge the status quo.” And my question to you is, “Okay, great. How do you want to do that?” How do you answer that?
CAM: I think we’ve talked about before, that people leader versus individual contributor role. And I’ve also seemed to thrive in those individual type contributor roles, where it’s more about your informal power and your informal managerial skills, versus that formal power and leadership. If I had to choose between the two, the individual contributor roles always seem to spark more joy and interest in my life.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay. So we’ve gotten to, “I want to challenge the status quo, so that we can focus on things that matter most. And I want to do that by being an individual contributor collaborator.” I love that word, and I think it really reflects what you’ve been able to do, in terms of working through informal relationships. Right? So as an individual contributor collaborator.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so the third question then becomes, “Where do you want to do this? In what type of environment?”
CAM: Yeah. When I look at my motivations, what motivates me, here it is. Definitely look for a place that is a forward thinking, disruptive, innovative type of organization. I think it’s kind of the culture of the organization that really intrigues me the most.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let me ask you a question. I’m sure you’ve been to companies, and maybe you had this in your office, where they have the values listed on a poster in every meeting room. Right? So I want you to imagine you’re walking into again, regardless of role, assuming you have your ideal role; I want you to imagine you’re walking in first day into that company, and you see the values poster on the wall. Just name them, in terms of what comes up first.
CAM: My core values for me are truth. And when I talk about truth, it’s having that backbone and disagreeing, unflinching and your accountability and honesty, I think is… “We’re going to take a stand for what we believe, and we’re going to do it; it’s okay to disagree with somebody, as long as you do it in a respectful manner. It’s not a bunch of “yes” people that are just going to say “yes” automatically.” My other core value is excellence. And we talked about it; people care about what they’re working on, and they own their results. And then for me, independence, self-reliance, I think is a huge core value for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: All I’m trying to get you to look at, even when you think 10 years, 15 years down the line, or next week, is, do you have an idea in your mind around what would be a good container for the work that you want to do? What I hear you saying is, “10 years from now, I want to work in a place where I’m challenging the status quo, so that we can focus on what matters most. I want to do it as an individual contributor leader, who leverages collaborative skills, working with different relationships. I want to do it in an organization that values excellence, truth, independence, and has a strong, shared sense of purpose and goals. And I want to do it with other individuals.” Right? “So I’m not going to be this lone wolf, just doing it on my own.” That’s the long game. If that resonates with you, now we can take a step back.
MURIEL WILKINS: “So what are the decisions that I’m making today, and how much are these decisions aligned with putting me on that path for this destination that I’ve outlined for myself 10 years from now, the 10 year destination?” Okay? And this is where you’re going to have to make some trade-offs, right? This is going to work completely against your drive for perfection, because there is not going to be a perfect decision. What you have to ask yourself is, “Which trade-off is more in alignment with this vision that I have for myself?”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s the question: A. And B, “Is this a trade-off I can live with for now?” Because it’s temporary. Everything changes. The trade-off will be different in your next role. So as you think about where you are now, right, and some of the decisions that you have to make; taking the offer you have, potentially entertaining the new opportunity that’s just come up. Which trade-offs would put you more in alignment with this longer term vision?
CAM: I know the opportunity that I have right now, I definitely, I think I could live with. The conversation my wife and I had this morning is that the job that came up, there’s some risk, but there could be a good reward from doing that. And it’s like, “Do you take the short term pain for the long-term gain?” The role I have now, it’s a much more safer choice, even though it’s not my ideal industry I’ve necessarily wanted to work in; but it does give me that exposure. And I think it just gives me more experiences that are different. Whereas, if I go to this other role, it’s kind of ward the same. It’s kind of more like, “Hey, get my foot in the door at a company, show them I can add value, and then you really can find that next role.” That’s kind of the way I’ve viewed it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You framed it as short-term pain for long-term gain. And I would throw the question back at you, in terms of thinking about it in terms, what’s the short-term gain, rather than short-term pain? I think the discussion we had while we’ve been focusing on these just-in-time decisions that you have to make, in reality, it’s not going to be the last time you have to make these types of decisions.
CAM: I think the biggest takeaway is really this contrast/comparison about, “Do I want to be a people leader versus an individual collaborator contributor?” It’s kind of having that honest internal decision on which way I want to go.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think what I would recommend, strongly recommend, is as you continue on defining what’s next for you, that you really calibrate your internal dialogue and your conversations with yourself, and even your conversations with your wife, and your friends, and whoever else you use as your sounding board, against key questions that we asked. And I think specifically around which role, which position, and company is going to most honor your desire to be in a individual contributor leadership position down the line, in a way that you can actually move change and innovate.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if it ends up, for practical reasons, that in the short term, you can’t take a role like that, then it means, “How do I take advantage of this short-term position?I’ve just taken a little bit of a detour, but how do I then course-correct and come back to the path that I’ve outlined for myself?” Okay? And always come back to that; with that question of, “To what extent am I aligning with it?” Not a hundred percent. It doesn’t have to fit into the groove; but is it in the right direction? And if it’s not, okay. Then what purpose does it serve, and for how long? And that’s fine too. Okay?
CAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So hopefully this was helpful.
CAM: Great conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Good. I’m glad you found that helpful.
CAM: While I love s strong conclusion as much as the next person, Cam did not leave our session with a final answer of what he should do next, and which offer to accept, because quite simply, he wasn’t ready for that just yet. And my role was not to give him the answer. What he did walk away with, is a clear framework of how to think through his decision, in a way that would get him out of the endless loop he found himself in.
CAM: And sure enough, I heard from Cam a few weeks after our session. He shared that he had accepted a position in a different industry, that would enable him to venture out of the role that he felt he’d been typecast in. And he’ll be a people collaborator, responsible for working across teams as a cross-functional leader, which ultimately is the path he wants for his career; a path which will serve his purpose best, both in the short term and the longterm.
CAM: That’s it for this episode of Coaching Real Leaders. Next time.
SPEAKER: Many people want to step up and want ownership, but they’re very comfortable with doing what they’re told. And that balance is hard for me, right? I need things to happen. I have a clear image of what should happen; but I don’t want to impose on whoever’s working with me. And that’s the balance I’m challenged with, in terms of how to create leadership that is, people want to follow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my Producer, Mary Dooe, Assistant Producer, Liz Sanchez, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you, and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward; share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 7: How Can I Lead Authentically?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
— part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Emily” to protect her confidentiality. Her career has followed a winding path. She’s worked as an engineer, a corporate lawyer, and then transitioned into tech. She’s focused on the marketing side and until a few months ago had been working at the C-suite level until her recent career move.
EMILY: I actually just transitioned into a new role for a very large company. So kind of moving away from the startup, scale up growth environment. I kind of felt like I needed to take a little bit of a break, although that is not exactly how things have worked out. So far, I’ve sort of stepped into a role where I was initially going to be an individual contributor, and I kind of felt like I’ve been managing for more than a decade and I kind of wanted to transition to something different. And then I just quickly stepped back into the management role again.
MURIEL WILKINS: With any big career transition, it can often be a very self-reflective time as you leave one role and start another, especially at a new company in a new place. It’s natural to want to reassess what really matters to you and what your goals are. That’s where Emily is today.
EMILY: I’m not sure if I’m in the right role and I’m not sure if being a manager is the right role for me. I kind of feel like it was a natural progression and I really find it fulfilling. But I think in some cases it also can be really exhausting. I would say that my natural instinct is to not be somebody who’s like a highly visible leader. I like to build relationships individually with people and with my teams and I think on the one hand, it’s kind of served me well because I’ve been able to kind of build trust and build relationships on an individual level with my direct reports. But I think that sometimes with the CEO or COO or other C levels that I’m working with, sometimes it can be more of a challenge because I feel like I should be more visible, I should be more out there and that’s just not my natural disposition.
MURIEL WILKINS: Emily is wondering not just if she’s suited for a role, but if she’s suited for leadership. She isn’t feeling like the models of high-level leadership she’s seen out there are authentic to her and wonders if as an introvert they ever will be. So let’s dive into the coaching session now as I ask her a bit more about how she’s experienced being a leader thus far.
EMILY: One of the challenges I’ve had in leadership roles has been the feeling that one, I’m not in the right place or I’m not where I’m meant to be. And I think that part of that is like the feeling of imposter syndrome and feeling that I’m not capable of doing the work, but the other is also sometimes feeling inauthentic and not really living my values or just even living according to my own disposition because I think I am just naturally more of an introvert. I’m not somebody who likes to be the center of attention. I’m not somebody who has this big personality and just sort of comes into a room and commands attention. That’s not natural to me. I’m very comfortable with presenting and getting buy in on my ideas and things like that, but I think I tend to gravitate towards wanting to build relationships really informally and on a one-to-one basis with people. And I think it kind of goes both ways or it has kind of cut both ways for me in the past where on the one hand, I think when I am able to cultivate those relationships and really build a natural relationship on a one-to-one basis, I get to know people individually. I get to know their strengths. I get to listen. I like to listen a lot more than talk and I’m somebody who tends to speak when I feel like I have something to say. I think people tend to see that. But on the other hand, when you are in sort of a highly visible C level type role, people expect you sometimes to be a very visible person. It is a visible role. And I think sometimes I just haven’t always felt very comfortable doing that. And I think also it’s been sometimes difficult for me to build relationships with the CEO or with other C levels too. I think sometimes it’s been more of a challenge I think working with my superior and with those sort of at the same level rather than with my direct reports as an introvert.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s really helpful. Thank you. And as a fellow introvert, believe it or not, I can completely resonate with what you’re saying. If you were to sort of summarize the question that’s on your mind today, like why you’re here for coaching, what would that be for you?
EMILY: Oh, I think I have felt lately, I think a lot of people have been kind of rethinking where they are in their career and in their life. And just in light of the last year, year and a half, I think there are two things that sort of I’ve been grappling with, but one is dealing with imposter syndrome and also whether the profession that I’ve chosen is really the best kind of role for me or the best that aligns with my personality and my values.
MURIEL WILKINS: I would venture to say that those two questions are related around imposter syndrome and is the career path the right one for me in terms of from an authenticity standpoint. If you’re not feeling “comfortable” in the role in terms of feeling authentic in the role, then it will lead to feeling like an imposter. So if we were to disaggregate the two, I would suggest that we focus on this question around authenticity. And it’s really interesting because you first raised it as this question in the way that I just said it. You said, am I in the right role as a leader? Is it authentic to me? And then you follow it up with, how can I be in the role and feel authentic? And I think those are actually two different things. From your standpoint, what are the gaps between what you think is expected of you and what feels authentic to you?
EMILY: I think what is often expected is somebody who comes in with maybe more confidence, more of a presence, an ability to rally people behind you very quickly and get buy in, and I think be a little bit more outgoing in my demeanor. I’m somebody who I just recently started a new role and I spent a good deal of my initial few weeks just really listening and observing and reading and trying to understand the organization and the team and the cadence. I really didn’t feel like I had anything to say for several weeks, and in some cases I’m still kind of doing that. And I think that sometimes the expectation would be you’re in this leadership role, you should come in and make an impact quickly. I think that part of that is just because my personality is one where I don’t want to just start speaking and talking about things if I don’t really feel I have something meaningful to say. And I think that sometimes that can be perceived as a lack of leadership.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so have you in the past experienced that it was perceived as a lack of leadership? Like have you experienced that where folks sort of had those expectations and you didn’t rise up to them?
EMILY: I had a former boss who’s the CEO who once just said that he didn’t feel that I was really taking things forward quickly enough with the team. I think he just felt that I should be speaking more and having more of an executive presence, although I don’t know what that necessarily means per se, because my team, look, we had a plan, we had a strategy. We were executing on our strategy. We were meeting and exceeding our goals. So from a metrics perspective, we were where we needed to be. It was more, I think, from a personality perspective. I just wasn’t somebody who had sort of come in and just speak a lot at some of the board meetings and executive meetings. But if I were asked questions, I definitely was very prepared and had answers to things. It wasn’t like that was the issue. Some of it is a bit self-imposed. I think some of it is me feeling that imposter kind of being, like I am an imposter and not feeling like I’m in the right role. And so sometimes it makes me more reticent to dive in and to really assume more of a proactive like gregarious disposition where I’m like coming into meetings and kind of taking charge. I do feel like I am naturally a leader, I just don’t feel like I sort of fit the mold of what a typical leader might look like.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so is there a world where you can lead without fitting the mold of what a leader typically looks like?
EMILY: I’m not sure. I think the issue that I have maybe faced, some of it is like a bit gendered sometimes. And it might have been some of the teams that I’ve worked with where I’ve been the only woman on the team. I’ve been the only woman in the C-suite. In that sense, I think that that’s been one of the challenges. I’ve definitely found myself internalizing that and feeling small in certain situations. So I think that if the circumstances were different, then I probably… Part of it is like internal and part of it is probably external.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you’re right. I mean, you’re not operating in a vacuum. And so I think there’s two questions or there’s two parts of it. As you said, there’s the internal and the external. The external is the environment that you’re in. And are you in an environment where what you bring to the table stylistically as well as substantially, substance wise, are valued? And then there’s on the internal, I think there’s a piece, and this is going to be a question I’m going to ask you right after I finish summarizing this, but there is a piece around like how much are you willing to stretch from what is your “natural style”?
EMILY: I feel like I am constantly pushing myself out of my comfort zone. Just by virtue of taking leadership roles for me is pushing myself beyond my comfort zone, and I’ve been doing that for a while I guess. Maybe part of it, too, was like how much am I willing to continue spending time and energy in a profession that doesn’t always value me and where I feel like I’m internalizing and feeling like I’m out of place, maybe because of my gender, maybe because of my introversion. I’m not sure if it’s a combination of those things, but does it make sense to continue trying to kind of, you know, sometimes you just feel like Sisyphus every day. You’re pushing a boulder up the mountain. At what point do you say enough?
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here, because it’s important to pinpoint the key questions Emily is struggling with. One, is there a certain kind of leadership that does well, and does she fit into that? And two, is the onus on her to adapt to that leadership profile, and if so, at what cost? But I was curious whether these are questions that come up for her no matter where she is, or are they specific to the types of environment and companies she’s worked for to date? Let’s jump back in as I ask her just that.
EMILY: I think for me, I’ve always been somebody who’s tended to be very loyal to organizations and felt like maybe it’s not the company or the situation, maybe it’s me, and I need to learn from this experience, and this will push me beyond my comfort zone. And I think there is a lot of that, but I do think that there have been situations where I perhaps should have just moved on and just realized this is not the right environment for me. It’s not really making me feel, one, valued, or two, that maybe I’m bringing the best of myself out, where I’m able to flourish and really feel like I’m the best version of who I can be at work. That’s definitely an issue, is just maybe not drawing those boundaries sooner.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So I love that you used that word, boundaries. So what do you mean by that? How do you know when you are in a place where you feel valued and you feel like you can put your best foot forward?
EMILY: I don’t know. I mean, it makes me wonder sometimes what’s normal. Does anybody feel fully valued? I don’t know. There’s always pros and cons to every environment. No situation is perfect. I think that for me, I guess where it starts to feel really uncomfortable is where I feel like the situation is not one that really aligns with my personal values and is making me feel bad about myself. Some of that is maybe stuff that I can work on, where I’m feeling badly because I’m not saying no, or I’m feeling badly because I’m not asserting myself enough, or speaking up and saying, this is what I need, or this isn’t okay. I can’t do this, or I don’t have enough resources, or I’m not willing to work 85 hours a week anymore. Things like that. And part of that’s just on me, and not really, and pushing back. And then becoming resentful and just letting it fester.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So Emily, let me just say something about this. So you talked about boundaries and then about getting to a place where the environment or what you’re experiencing doesn’t feel aligned with your personal values. And everything that you mentioned around not saying no, or not saying, I need more resources, or I’m not going to stay late, while it may feel like it’s putting boundaries on everyone else, on the environment, in reality, when you’re doing those things, you’re actually putting a boundary on yourself, a boundary to stay aligned to your values. The minute you start focusing on, and it doesn’t mean that it doesn’t exist, but the minute it becomes contingent and dependent on the external factors, you do lose your power in the situation because it’s then what are they doing to me? And this is not to suggest that other people don’t behave badly. They do. But since I’m working with you, my question is going to be, how do you walk into every situation feeling like you add value, feeling valuable, feeling like you belong, even if others don’t believe so? Because that’s the thing that won’t change.
EMILY: That really feels like it hits the nail on the head, is not internalizing some of the things that I have. I’ve internalized some things and not been able to kind of separate. I’m not able to see how others perceive my worth or value as different than how I perceive my worth and value. And I think that that’s where it just becomes really muzzled.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, you lose yourself, right? We all do it. I mean, we all do it. We do it with work. We do it with love relationships. You do it with your kids. You wake up one day and you’re like, oh, wait a minute, who am I?
EMILY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s great for you is you do have this internal sense of alarm that’s going off, that’s saying, hold up a minute. Somehow I’ve lost myself here. This is not aligned with who I am. And the question is, does the environment change to align to who you are or do you change to align to the environment? And what I hear you saying is you feel like, hey, I have spent so much energy trying to align to the environment, and it’s exhausting. Then it becomes blurred, like, okay, is what they think really what I think about myself? And is that my metric? And so I think a big part of this is understanding, well, what are my values? What do I bring to the table? And standing strongly and firmly in that. Then we can talk about the how, which the how is, when do I need to speak up? When do I need to make decisions quickly? When do I need to listen? Those are just the delivery of it all. So if we go back to this conversation around what are the boundaries that you feel you need to put on yourself that would make you know that you are operating in a way that is more aligned with your values, what would those types of boundaries be?
EMILY: I think one is I have a lot of experience, and coming into roles, I think there’s always a feeling that you sort of need to prove yourself. You need to hit the ground running and earn trust with others and show that you’re able to deliver and perform. But at a certain point, I think when I start to feel like, okay, I’ve been able to deliver, and I have been performing, and I’ve been working collaboratively and cross-functionally across teams and really trying to earn trust and be proactive, and despite all of that, if I’m still feeling like I’m not valued, then it’s time to leave or find something else. And I think maybe that’s one thing, is just the way that I, you know, the feedback that I might get from colleagues, if that’s not something where I feel like it’s objectively fair or reflective of my capabilities or my performance, and maybe it’s because of, you know, going back to I’m not this big personality, I’m somebody who’s a bit quieter at work, but I think it does take a lot of leadership, and leading my team and working cross-functionally to deliver results. If I feel like it’s just not the right organization, where I feel like I’m not being authentic or I’m not able to be authentic and be who I am and objectively perform, then it’s just not the right environment for me. So it’s just time to move on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so that’s a boundary that you’re putting on yourself. When you think about it that way because there is this, you know, I keep going back to this, you feeling like you’re not valued, and you know the litmus test, it’ll be the feedback. What will make you feel like you are valued? How would you recognize that?
EMILY: Yeah, I think when I feel like I can be myself, and when I feel like my contributions are recognized, and I feel like I can be myself and don’t have to fully try to be something that I’m not on the team that I’m working with, that’s one thing. And I think feedback is certainly another. I think for me, I like to work in environments where risk is rewarded and vulnerability is something that’s encouraged, and inclusion is something that’s encouraged and celebrated, and where different viewpoints and different types of personalities and perspectives matter. And when you’re sort of in a group or on a team where everybody has to kind of fit a certain mold, I think a lot of times it’s not even intentional, it’s just, it’s sort of like this is how things work, and you either are this or you aren’t this. And if you aren’t, then you’re excluded. I think I’ve been able to get to the point where I can recognize when I feel that way, where I’m just, I’m not fitting whatever mold is in this group. And so it’s not necessarily me. It’s just, it’s the environment. And I think traditionally, I just internalized it and said, there’s something wrong with me. Why am I not able to be my best self here? So I think that’s something that I have been able to recognize over the last few years, especially.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And what we talked about is making sure that even when you are in an environment where you feel like you don’t belong, or you’re getting signals that you don’t fit the mold, so it’s not even you feel that you don’t belong, that you’re just getting signals that you’re sort of an anomaly, an outlier in that environment or that culture, that you still believe, you still believe, that you’re valuable, that it has no impact on your own self-worth as a person. Because if you do start internalizing it, I’m using your words in terms of internalizing it that way, no matter which environment you go to, you’re going to carry that with you.
EMILY: Yeah. I think that’s also, that’s kind of the crux of the issue, too, is getting there. I think that for many years, or probably most of my life, I’ve used external metrics as validation. And that’s gotten me far in terms of objective accomplishments, like school and work. But I think fundamentally the issue is more, how do I accept myself despite anything external? And I think that by not being able to do that, it’s inhibited me from really reaching my potential professionally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, that’s huge, Emily. I guess I would ask, in all the experiences that you’ve had that have felt challenging to you, where you felt like you were an outlier, were you being yourself?
EMILY: I think that I was, but I think that in some cases I probably could have still moved forward in those roles if I didn’t pay attention as much to those external things. But I think that the external metrics and the way that you feel on a day-to-day basis with your colleagues and your coworkers, that does matter. I think it’s important. You want to feel like you’re included and you’re valued for who you are, despite being different from everybody else around you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, look, there’s a thin line between what people actually think about you and the story you make up about what people think about you.
EMILY: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I just want to make sure you know the difference. So I’m not saying ignore feedback, ignore the fact that you might walk into room and nobody looks like you and everybody acts a certain way and it’s very different and they leave you out, but I want you to see it as fact, if that’s what’s actually happening.
EMILY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then if it is, then the question becomes exactly the question you pose. It’s how much tolerance you have. Is this worth it to me? And only you can answer that, because that goes back to the impact that you want to have. We’ll get there around purpose and meaning and all that. It’s only worth it to you if there’s a meaning or purpose behind it, right? You’re not going to do it just for the sport of it. I mean, you could, but I’d be curious why you would, right? So there’s a thin line between what people think about you and the narrative you tell yourself and internalize about what people think about you, and I’d be curious to know, as a result of what you believe people have thought about you, or you’re asserting people have thought about you, or how they feel about you, what have you told yourself about your distinct approach to leading and managing?
EMILY: Well, I think that I’ve been able to lead and manage in a way that’s been authentic to me, and I think overall that I have been able to do that. I don’t think that I would be able to show up for work and get out of bed in the morning if I didn’t feel like I could at least be the leader that I felt like I should be to my team. And that’s one thing that I am really proud of. For me, it’s just really important to create environments for my team, even if the organization doesn’t necessarily foster some of those values of empathy and belonging and inclusion and vulnerability and risk-taking, things like that, I think, are really important.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s interesting to me, Emily, is you walked in with the question of, “Am I in the right role as a leader? Is that type of role authentic to me?” And then you talked about, “How can I be in a role and feel authentic?” And you define that as being able to operate in a way that is aligned with your values. We then see two variables that lead to you being able to operate in a way that is aligned with your values. One is in the boundaries that you create that help you stay aligned to those values. Okay? So it’s no different than if I say, “Hey, one of my values is being healthy,” right? Trying to optimize my health. So a boundary that I will create is I won’t eat sweets during the week. So that’s a boundary that I create for myself. I don’t create the boundary on other people. I don’t create the boundary by saying, “Hey, everybody else in the world, don’t give me sweets.” Okay? So that’s what I mean by a boundary on yourself. But then the second aspect that you brought up is environment, and are you putting yourself in an environment that reflects and that is additive, both in terms of what you add to it and what it adds back to you, the values that you’re trying to live up to. Using that metaphor about being healthy, it’s the same for me, right? I can say, “Hey, my value is to be healthy,” but if where I’m sitting for lunch every day is the corner fast-food place, I mean, yeah. I could still try to do it, but it’ll be way more challenging and it’s going to be hard for me to create that type of energy. Right? And so my question is, to what extent have you been able to seek out environments, cultures, where those very things that you just listed, which I daresay are your values, are exhibited and held up as important from a cultural standpoint?
EMILY: I think that I have sought up those environments. I think working in tech, it can be challenging no matter where you go, and to be honest, sometimes I feel as though one of the reasons I stay in the profession and I seek leadership roles that are visible is to be that person who’s the woman at the table, because I have two daughters and I want them to know that they can do what they want. And maybe that sounds silly, to think that I’m pursuing a profession that maybe doesn’t feel like it’s maybe the most authentic or the best for me, but it’s to show that it’s possible. But sometimes I just wonder, is this worth it? At what cost to me and my health or my feelings of being who I should be or who I want to be? So I think that I have sought out rules, but I haven’t always had the best luck in finding the right rules.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is an important point that I’m getting here with Emily, because as much as we’re trying to figure out what is authentic or inauthentic for her, we also want to be able to differentiate between a role and an environment. It’s very easy to confuse the two, but it’s a good framework for her to think about as she continues to decide the right path for herself. Let’s get back into the conversation and the actions she can take.
EMILY: I think that maybe because of the environments, I conflate the two sometimes, because I think about, “Well, I can’t really be myself or feel like an authentic leader in this role because it’s me, and because I’m introverted and I’m quieter.” I think of it as those are the issues, but maybe it’s just that it doesn’t fit well within the organization, and the organization doesn’t embrace those.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, exactly. So look, I think that you need to think about it, not as, “Can I succeed in this environment in spite of being an introvert?” and shift that to, “What type of environment can I be in where I can succeed because I’m an introvert?” There’s a difference between the two. One is much more, “How do I survive in this?” which means that the environment isn’t as aligned with what you feel you bring to the table stylistically. And the other, it doesn’t mean that the culture is exactly like you, it just maybe is one that values diversity of style and diversity of thought and diversity of approach more broadly. Okay? I’m not suggesting that would be easy to find, but I do think what you said around conflating the role and the environment, you don’t want to do. You want to disaggregate the two. It’d be different if you were telling me, “Hey, I am horrible as a marketer.” Right? “I’m horrible at managing my team.” Then I’d be like, “Yeah, are you in the right role?” “I’m actually horrible as a leader.” I don’t know if that’s necessarily true, or I haven’t heard you give any evidence of that. It’s more, are you able to lead to your full potential in that particular culture? And then I also think this part around is it worth it to you, it’s interesting, because when we first started talking, you were like, “Where am I going to be 20 years from now?” And what’s worth it? I don’t know. I don’t know about you, but what something is worth to you today, was it the same worth to you 20 years ago?
EMILY: Definitely not.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? Exactly. So I’m all for long-range planning, but at the same time, I would venture to say, think about it in terms of bring a bit more presence to it.
EMILY: I think maybe one of the challenges or the questions that I have now is working so hard, and where does it take me? If it doesn’t feel like it’s serving me now, is it? And it seems like it’s more not because it’s not something that I’m interested or passionate about or want to do. It’s more finding the right environment to thrive better in.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so how is it serving you? What is the meaning in your work right now?
EMILY: Well, I think in my current role, I don’t feel like I’m able to really reach my potential and do some of the things that I’ve been able to do in prior roles. And I don’t want to stay for four years or longer with an organization that just doesn’t align with the things that I want.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I should have asked this a long time ago in our conversation, and I didn’t, but Emily, to what extent do you believe you’re a leader?
EMILY: I feel like I am a leader, but I think I definitely have doubts about my ability to be a leader. On the day-to-day, when I’m working with my team, I feel good and I feel like I’m a leader, and I feel like I’ve been able to really achieve great results with my team. I’ve had some feedback from managers just saying, essentially, that you should be more visible and more present and things that I just don’t feel like I am. It’s just like I’m not this big personality.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. But does that mean that you’re not a leader?
EMILY: I don’t think it does, but it definitely makes me question it.
MURIEL WILKINS: It tends to be that there are certain behaviors that the world tends to appoint as quote unquote, good leadership behaviors. But at the end of the day, it’s how you carry out whatever that leadership agenda is. And is it done in a way where you can drive things forward as well as ensure followership, the people side of it? And so whether you are something or not versus whether you feel you are that or not are two different things. And I have a sense that you’re feeling about it, again, what we talked about before, the narrative that you give to what the reality is might be getting in your way a little bit. So I don’t know, like if you were to just claim that you are a leader regardless of how you feel about it, what difference would that make for you?
EMILY: I think it would change the dynamic quite a bit if I focused on objectively, I am a leader. I’ve been able to build really high performing and engaged teams and I’ve done it despite not maybe fitting that typical mold of what typically is ascribed to leadership, leadership attributes. So I think that if I look at just think about like the reviews that I have or the performance of our team, I think it says quite a lot, but yeah, I think that I have tended to just kind of focused on the story what I tell myself or internalize, have allowed myself to internalize sometimes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I don’t know if that’s serving you.
EMILY: No, I don’t think it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So step one is owning who you are and the role that you’re in. And unless you can do that, nobody else will. That’s for sure. Right?
EMILY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I think the practice for you, and you can practice this all the time, is really asking yourself like what is actually happening and then what is the feeling I’m having about what is happening? And let me deal with what’s actually happening because that’s the reality of it. The reality of it for you is you are leading. It might not look like everybody else, but you are leading. So step number one is owning your part just in a different way than you have in the past. And then step number two is now let me check the environment. And you’re putting a boundary, which I think you made very clear, a boundary around, I want to operate in an environment that is more closely aligned with what is important to me and how I want to live my life and the person I want to be, which is I’m just going to name some of the things that you said, empathetic, vulnerable, inclusive. I mean, I’m sure there’s much more. And if this environment has shown evidence that it’s not aligned with that, then you have a choice to make. And the choice is, do I stick around because I want to influence the environment in that direction or do I move on, but with a very, very clear antenna so that I can try to identify cultures that do do that.
EMILY: Yeah, that definitely makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what’s the question that’s coming up for you? I’m feeling like there’s either a but or a question.
EMILY: I guess when I think about the culture and environment of the organization, I think that’s where I go back to like is this industry one where that’s possible? And I know it, like it must be, it’s difficult because there’s just not a whole lot of representation I think in some of the, you know, and especially in kind of leadership roles, I think, but there are companies where it is possible. I think it’s just sometimes difficult to find. So I think that’s one of the reasons why I felt like maybe it’s just not even the right industry or profession for me. And maybe it makes sense to find something else because it is exhausting kind of like looking.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Perhaps. I can’t sit here and I would be like doing so much wrong by sitting here and saying, yeah, it’s not possible. Right? You only need one company. It’s kind of like finding a partner, right? Like you only need to find one, but it’s hard. Yeah, it is hard because you’re a bit trying to find a unicorn or what feels like a unicorn. And hopefully that won’t be the case in the future. It won’t be unicorns. Maybe it’ll be more the norm, but for now you’re finding it hard. So you, again, that’s a decision you have to make. Do I want to keep looking for something that’s unique in this industry or do I want to switch industry where that type of culture might be more plausible, right? And this comes back to what do you want, right? What’s the purpose you have? And so let’s talk a little bit about that because what gives anything meaning is the purpose behind it. Even the most menial tasks, what gives it meaning is the purpose behind it. If I’m sitting, I hate like sitting down to do bills. But if I just think about it as, oh my God, I’m just doing bills. And again, I’m saying the same thing I told you not to do, I tell myself a story about writing out bills and like how boring it is and oh my God and all the mail and all this. But if I understand the purpose behind me doing bills, which is to support, to create an environment where me and my family can live and or even as basic as not getting bad credit score, right? Then it brings meaning behind the action. Okay. So whether you stay in the tech industry or move to a different industry or stay in your current role for now or leave, there’s no good or bad. The question is, do you understand the purpose and meaning behind your decision?
EMILY: Yeah, I think for me, I mean, one of the reasons why I’ve really liked being in leadership roles and leading teams is just being able to rally people behind a common goal and to create a sense of environment where people feel like they can be their best selves and do the best work of their careers. Like that’s always been my goal as a leader. And if I’m able to do that and bring the best out of people on my team and bring out their best skills and how help them grow, then that’s really satisfying as a leader. But I think what gets me out of bed in the morning is one being able to learn and grow myself because I like to sort of approach every day as something new, it’s an opportunity to grow myself and that’s something that’s really important to me, but also to be able to help nurture others and to kind of bring the best out of the teams that I work with. So that doesn’t necessarily have to be in one industry or another. I think that’s just like who I am as a person. And that could happen in probably different industries, in different environment.
MURIEL WILKINS: Emily started our coaching session questioning whether she can be a leader in spite of who she is. And I love she concluded our discussion by affirming that she can be a leader because of who she is. This is the key turning point for one to realize that truly leading with authenticity lies in your ability for your career to become an expression of yourself. It’s a space where you can provide value in a way that is aligned with who you are. This goes beyond understanding your why, that north star that so many talk about. It’s actually about understanding who you are so that no matter what role and environment you’re in, you stay true to that. That is at the core of being, living and leading authentically. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
KRISH:  I self-sabotage a lot because I kind of overthink, maybe I’m not good at this. Maybe I need to wait it out a little bit more, or maybe I should, you know, there’s a lot of things I always debate in my head. And I think I self-sabotage my own chances sometimes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter at Muriel M Wilkins or on Instagram at Coach Muriel Wilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 7: How Does My Team Perceive Me?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Michelle,” to protect her confidentiality. She has a PhD in physics and she’s bridged the gap between technical know-how and management in the past. And she’s now taken on even a bigger challenge, entrepreneurship. Right now her startup is small, but as she grows the organization, she wants to learn from past leadership experiences and create the kind of workplace she believes can succeed and be a good environment for everyone.
MICHELLE: I’m there to help people succeed. I don’t want my team to do as I say, I think it’s better to have everyone with their own opinion. And then getting people, what I found is sometimes when you lead in that way and then you put your leg down because something needs to happen, then people get resentful. I think there is a balance there in terms of leadership that people want you to… Strong leaders are able to create a situation where people will follow them without resenting, and that’s a struggle. So it’s getting if you want the balance right.
MURIEL WILKINS: As she begins to grow this new company, she wants to get that leadership balance right, the balance of being collaborative and supportive while at the same time needing to be directive at times.
MICHELLE: This is something I’ve been struggling with throughout my career, which is, how do you encourage people? Many people want to step up and want ownership, but they’re very comfortable with doing what they’re told. They really need the incentives of someone telling them. And that balance is hard for me. I need things to happen. I have a clear image of what should happen, but I don’t want to impose on whoever’s working with me. And that’s a balance I’m challenged with in terms of how to create a leadership that people want to follow without spending all the energy of convincing other people.
MURIEL WILKINS: Michelle and I begin our conversation by her sharing what her leadership experience has been like in the past, and how it informs how she leads and manages today.
MICHELLE: I seem to always gravitate towards big challenges, things that are complicated and hard to achieve. What’s come back to me is, from first day outside academia I was told I have leadership skills. During that first position I became a team leader, I managed people that were much more experienced than I was. Because they were great technically, but they were not necessarily leaders. And I naturally take a lot of responsibilities, I tend to take more than my role says. I tend to be not have a problem with challenging authority, and sometimes authority doesn’t like it.
MURIEL WILKINS: In your previous role, what was that like managing the people, your team? You said a few people. How many people were on your team?
MICHELLE: I was directly managing two people, but I was part of a leadership of a group that was 20 people together.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what was that experience like for you?
MICHELLE: I like managing people. I know many technical people, I do like the people management part. It’s sometimes very rewarding and it’s sometimes frustrating when I feel… On one hand, I see my role as a leader to facilitate success for my team, but it’s hard for me to get to the point where I feel… I don’t know if trust is the word, because they do trust me personally. But I don’t know if I am coming across enough as a leader. And it sometimes feels that my honesty works against me in that sense. I had an interesting discussion with my boss back then. And he said that he figured out that management in complaining that I don’t push my people enough, and my people are complaining that they push them too much. Now for me it sounds like, okay, that’s my role, that’s what I should be doing. But apparently that’s what people are expecting. I think that’s an ongoing challenge, that’s a pretty good way to define where I am in terms of the challenge. I perceive my role as a leader, wherever I’m as a leader, in one way, but somehow I don’t come across in the way I want to.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, let’s talk a little bit more about that. You shared a couple of things. One, your frustration with not feeling fully trusted, not on a personal side, but there seems to be a bit of a trust element with your team, or people that you manage. And then the other piece of feedback that you’ve gotten is, others seem to feel like you don’t push your team enough, but yet your team seems to feel like you push them too much. So there’s a disconnect. And as a result, you’re at a place of, okay, what does this mean in terms of I need to come across as a leader, particularly as a leader of people? Let’s start with the first one, this frustration that you feel around this trust piece. Talk to me a little bit more about that. What does that look like?
MICHELLE: We had the situation with the customer, with a team I was working with for over a year, and closely. And they knew me, we had good relationships. And the customer really wanted to come and visit because it was some crisis. We did not have enough time to discuss this internally because of schedule stuff. And at the meeting with the customer, with the team present, there was nothing behind the scenes. I was trying to push back. I was trying to verify that the customer is coming from one specific thing and will not have used the visit to pull other resources and stuff like that. But I had to agree to the visit. And the team, instead of starting from the assumption that I had a good reason, or trying to think what is the reason I did that, they were just angry. And afterwards I talked with each of them individually. And once they calmed down, they all agreed that, no, I didn’t have any other option. But it was frustrating that people that know me, and know that I work hard to support them, and I would never blame them in front of the customer or do anything like that, assume I’m taking the easy way out. Instead of assuming I’ll keep doing what I always do for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. When you explained it to them, and it sounds like they understood, did they provide any rationale as to why they thought that you’re approaching it in that way?
MICHELLE: They said, “Well, we will do the hard work so you can make it easy for you to make the decision.” That’s where they came from. And when I pushed back to them and asked, “Okay, what would you have done differently? Would you choose something else?” They didn’t have an answer for it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What do you think they were frustrated at?
MICHELLE: I think they were frustrated by the situation. This whole thing had to do with the problem on our side, and they felt blamed and they felt the customer coming is a way to challenge their work and criticize their work. And they were unhappy with that. All natural reactions. All that is okay to feel as a person that we’re in a professional world. And these were not kids.
MURIEL WILKINS: If it had gone “better”, what would’ve that look like?
MICHELLE: That would look like, in my mind, even if they come to me and say, “Adi…” It’s the same question, why you did that? But instead of being blaming, being inquisitive, assuming, give me the benefit of the doubt that I’m doing the right thing for the team. That’s what I was missing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a step back. What’s helpful about our coaching conversation so far is that Michelle is aware that there was tension in certain situations between her and her team. And this is what’s led her to explore coaching, so that she can ensure that she leads effectively from the start as she builds her new company. And while she’s aware of the tension, she’s not able to see the root of it just yet. And what I’m picking up from Michelle early in our conversation is a dynamic where there are some unmet expectations. Her team is expecting her to react one way, but then she doesn’t. And she’s expecting her team to react to her a different way, but then they don’t. Unmet expectations are often the source of interpersonal tension. So we continue the conversation exploring what expectations Michelle has of those she leads. I’m going to push a little bit here. Why do you think they should give you the benefit of the doubt?
MICHELLE: Because I’ve worked with them for a year and they know I’m working for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And have and your team ever had explicit conversations that that’s one of the core principles that you operate on is giving each other the benefit of the doubt?
MICHELLE: Not in those words. I did talk to them about the fact that I see my role is to support them. And that I would never, if I go to management, it will never be “this person is doing a bad job”. No, their performance is my performance. There’s no difference there. That discussion we did have. About that, I don’t think we had that specific discussion.
MURIEL WILKINS: A couple of things. Whenever you feel frustrated, whenever there’s frustration, frustration exists. Typically, at the core frustration, is that there are some misaligned expectations, or misaligned assumptions. One person assumes one thing and the other person assumes the other thing. And then they come together and there’s a little bit of a collision, and frustration ensues. Which is what happened here. Which is why to really operate as best as you can as a team, particularly when you go into moments that might be stressful. Or not to say that this was necessarily a crisis, it could have felt like a crisis. It’s really important proactively to explicitly state, what are the conditions that need to be in place so that we can operate as a team that has a high level of trust? Or whatever, a high level of collaboration, whatever it is that you’ve established as the norms of that group. Part of those conditions are, what are we assuming about each other, about our work, about our customers, about the business? And the more explicitly you can state that, the better off you are. And so part of what’s happening here is there’s a reaction based on their own assumptions. And I don’t know, I’m not talking to them, so I don’t know what their assumptions were. But they’re reacting to the situation. Maybe it’s their assumption’s, “Oh my god, okay, now we’re going to have to do a bunch of work.” Or maybe it’s, “Wait a minute, I thought Michelle said she would always have our back. This doesn’t feel like she has our back, so what’s going on here?” They make up a story. And what you would like them to do is basically have the story of, no matter what happens, give Michelle the benefit of the doubt, so that then they can trust and move forward.
MICHELLE: What you’re saying makes a lot of sense. And I think that’s a good point to remember to explicitly say things. But when I talk about trust, part of that needs to be formed in a relationship. Sometimes saying something is just saying it.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s both. Trust actually is a result of doing what you said you were going to do. So it’s both. It’s, here’s what I’m going to do, here’s how we’re going to operate, let’s lay down the expectation. And then, let’s follow through. Particularly when you’re dealing with teams, people who aren’t bound by anything but work and maybe a shared sense of mission. So yes, absolutely, your behavior, you being able to walk the talk is what’s going to increase those credits of trust over time and fill up that bucket. But it certainly helps accelerate the process if proactively you and your team can sit down and say, “How are we going to operate with each other? What do we assume about each other? And let’s test that out and see if it works.” And one of the big ones is to be able to say, “Can we agree that we will give each other the benefit of the doubt?” Rather than assume on the other end that that’s actually what’s being done.
MICHELLE: Can I just challenge that a bit?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure.
MICHELLE: Because I work in an environment of physicists and engineers, which means very little touchy-feely talk. I’m more aware of that than most of the people around me. I educate myself, it’s interesting for me. No one has that type of discussions around me. And sometimes it feels that the fact I’m open to some of these discussions and to hearing feedback actually makes me seem weaker instead of stronger. It could be specific to the environment of people that don’t like to talk. And then if someone actually brings up something, it feels people don’t know how to interact with that.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s your evidence of that?
MICHELLE: Just another example, if there’s any discussion or if I make a mistake, I’ll say “I’m sorry.” And then someone told me, “Oh, but you said ‘I’m sorry’, and then you move on. So it feels like saying I’m sorry is you didn’t mean it.” But it’s in the middle of an actual meeting. Most other leaders around me don’t say, “I’m sorry.” Don’t recognize their mistakes. And people seem more comfortable with that. I’m struggling with figuring out the right balance between being very open and honest. Like I’m saying “I’m sorry” and didn’t mean it. And making sure I give the right impression of being professional and being a leader. And it feels like opening up these softer points works against me. Now, that’s how I work, I’m not going to stop doing those, but that’s part of what I’m struggling with.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you say works against you, is it actually getting in the way of the work being done, or however success is being defined in terms of your role and your responsibility?
MICHELLE: I think it all goes into that trust place, of trusting me as a leader. It feels that being open to feedback, having open discussions makes people perceive me as a weaker leader. And trust me less, so there’s less of assumption of positive intent and ability. So it feels like I need to reprove that all the time because I come across as a different type of leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you think about leaders who are, in your mind successful, what do they do?
MICHELLE: They’re typically, the strongest thing they communicate is confidence, and a lot of belief in their own ability.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I’m going to ask you to think of somebody who you think exudes confidence, a leader who exudes confidence. What is it specifically that this person does that makes you walk away feeling like, yes, they demonstrate confidence?
MICHELLE: I don’t know, it feels like they’re very comfortable with everything they’re doing. And they always assume they are the best person to do that, even in situation where they actually never did this before. So they could actually say the words, “I haven’t done this before,” but it comes across as, “That’s fine, I can do it. And that’s not a problem.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And so it’s your sense that’s what others are expecting of you?
MICHELLE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so when you think about your level of confidence, where is that?
MICHELLE: I’m very confident with my abilities, I’m also very aware that I have weaknesses. Sometimes I’ll catch myself during a situation of raising my voice when I shouldn’t, or things like that. And what I’ve started thinking that it could be that comes across as lack of confidence. Although, I don’t see it that way. I think being aware of your weakness and trying to improve is a strength. But I think it might come across that way. I think people interpret me being aware of my weakness as a lack of confidence, or maybe a lack of ability to make things happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in the conversation, like often happens when we’re caught in a conundrum, Michelle is having a hard time trying to pinpoint the real issue. Does she demonstrate too much confidence, and hence, others don’t trust her? Or do they not trust her because she doesn’t demonstrate enough confidence? I’m not in the room with her when these situations happen, so I can’t say one way or the other for sure. But what I can do at this point is try to bring some structure to her thinking, mirror back to her what I’m hearing, and see what resonates. I do that by offering her a way to think about her situation to see if it sticks. I think you have a choice here. Part of being effective in terms of having leadership presence, which I think is really what you’re asking about, is how do I present myself as a leader? Is being able to do two things. One is coming off as credible, which are all the things you said around being confident, et cetera. Really having a voice for yourself, as we call it. And the other is being able to connect with others, be relatable to others, which is what you might call having a voice for others. And it’s really the intersection between those two things. Being able to present yourself while still being connected to others, that is that intersection that we feel that we are in a presence of an effective leader. And I think what you’re saying, we can play around with this a little bit. What you’re experiencing is, you do have a voice for yourself. You have confidence in your ability to do the work, you speak up, you share around what’s going well, what might not be going well. So you have a voice at the table. But your ability to connect with others, at least in that environment, might not really hit the mark. And this is important, because what it means to connect with others is situational. What it means to connect to somebody in a nonprofit organization where you might be volunteering versus in the boardroom within an executive team, is very different. I’m going to ask you, what would it mean to connect, to be relatable with your team?
MICHELLE: That’s a good question, and I think you hit the mark there. I’m very aware of usually where the other person is, so I can feel if someone is stressed or unhappy, but they do have a gap of being able to bridge that. I think sometimes saying the words, just trying to communicate something in words is not the right thing. I’ll give you a more recent example. I was talking to someone and I was trying to get them to understand a point, something they would not agree. I told them, “Listen, I’m trying to be harsh with you because I want you to succeed. And if I’m just nice, then I’m not doing my job.” They understood that, this is a very smart person, but I don’t think it came across. I keep thinking I was too harsh in that meeting and it didn’t come across. Although they said, “Yeah, we understand this and we want direction, we want people to be direct and we like being direct.” So all the right words were said, but they still feel I missed something.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, if we take that particular example, what is it in the way that you delivered that message that made it come across as “too harsh”?
MICHELLE: I was telling them that what they did will eventually cause them to fail. A, because that’s my opinion. And B, because trying to… What happened, I was trying to explain something in detail, we discussed about details, and then they went and ignored it. They’re allowed to do that. But I was trying to come across, just communicate the risks they’re taking. In terms of being accurate in the words I was saying, I was accurate. But I should have tried to find a way that would make them feel more comfortable. I don’t know. That’s exactly the gap. How do I communicate something? We all communicate things that are not always easy to listen to without making someone feel uncomfortable. And that’s a point of view, saying the right things, communicating the clear picture I have in my mind to someone else, and having the words to say it in accurate way is not enough. There is a way to get to where the other person is, and that’s a gap I think I have.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. A big piece of this is, as you said, meeting people where they are. And there’s a couple of components to meeting people where they are. First of all, using their language. I’m curious around, would that individual have used the language of failure? Were they already in a position of interpreting the situation or the risk of their decisions as one of failure?
MICHELLE: No. And that was the position I’m trying to get them out of. They were a position of long discussions and not making decisions, and I was concerned that would work against them.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’re trying to lead them to a certain point, and your approach to doing that is to tell them. Tell them, goes back to that bucket of having a very strong voice for yourself, demonstrating credibility. You have an opinion and you tell it. Connecting doesn’t always come from telling somebody. If you want to connect with someone, if you want them to feel like, okay, I understand. Where does that come from, do you think?
MICHELLE: Listening.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. If we take that back to that particular situation we just talked about, knowing that your goal is still to get them to understand what the risks are. If we rewind, how could you have played that out differently?
MICHELLE: I should have probably led with questions and have them get to the answers themselves.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What questions could you have led with?
MICHELLE: What would happen in this situation? How long do you think that would take? What would happen if we got to this point?
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, absolutely. And it doesn’t take a ton of questions. And it doesn’t mean that eventually you don’t go back and say, “Okay, I’ve heard you, and so would you like to hear what I’m thinking about this?” But you went straight from the talking, talking, talking, it sounds like, to you now than telling them rather than creating a bridge. So you jumped from one side to the other and tried to bring the person along with you. Rather than, oh, here’s a bridge, let’s walk across the bridge together, and hopefully we’ll end up at the same conclusion. Okay?
MICHELLE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what do you think stopped you in that particular situation, or maybe in other situations, to create that bridge?
MICHELLE: Frustration from not being able to communicate what’s in my mind to the other person.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You have to think for yourself in that moment, what’s your goal? Is your goal to just get what’s in your mind out there, and your opinion out there? Is that the end goal?
MICHELLE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so you want to start with the end in mind. What is it that I’m trying to accomplish here? And based on what I’m trying to accomplish, then let me take a couple steps back and ask myself, how do I need to behave in this moment? Do I need to be talking? Do I need to be asking the questions? Do I need to explain some more? Do I need to reframe the conversation? So that you can have different choices rather than go straight to, let me just keep doing what I’ve been doing, which is try to get my point across, and hope and cross my fingers that they will get it. That they will get it and they will understand. I do think that this notion of you making sure that you get your voice across and at the same time asking yourself, what is going to make this message relevant and relatable and connected to the audience or the person or the stakeholder that I’m speaking to? I think that piece is critical for you.
MICHELLE: Yeah, I agree. I think it’s still a challenge to make it happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: It is a challenge, I didn’t say it’s easy. But what do you think it requires you to be able to do in order to make that happen?
MICHELLE: I need to find a way to shut up more. Just speak less.
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen, I heard this from one of my colleagues years ago, and I’ve used it with a ton of clients. Is sometimes it’s just having the words, writing out the words “wait” on a piece of paper during every conversation that you have. And wait, W-A-I-T, stands for, “Why am I talking?”
MICHELLE: Yeah. I actually had some practice with that, because I was doing customer interviews and you have to shut up and let people talk, even if they’re saying things you don’t agree with. That was amazing. But I need to find a way to transform that from situation I’m aware of needing to absorb, and I’m not there to speak, to really internalizing that I’m bringing value by not talking.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s huge. If you can repeat that over and over again that you are bringing value by not talking. And look, we’ve all been trained at a very young age. Who got the points in school? It was the person who raised their hand. It was the person who spoke, it was the person who had the “right answer”. And then all of a sudden you become a leader and you realize, oh, it’s not about always having the right answer. It’s also about being able to listen and being able to understand so that we can get to the right answer. It’s this ability to do both. Right? To do both. And I think that it would be helpful for you, maybe before you go into these types of conversations, whether it’s with your team or with other stakeholders, particularly where you know there might not be a common understanding, is to actually go in prepared with some questions that you might want to ask. That way you have a sense of, this is the bridge that I want to create so that I can get there. Talk to me about how this applies to your current role. How does it manifest itself there?
MICHELLE: With my own startup, it’s about building relationships and building trust. It’s also about really the presence of leadership and communicating my ability to people I only recently met. With some people it’s easier. But it’s still a challenge, how do I come across the way I need to come across and I want to come across? Because you want to think, have a reasonable picture of how you’re coming across and correct it if you need. How do I come across correctly when I perceive myself in a certain way and there is a gap there? I think that might be a mistake.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. Whether it’s their perception or what you’re doing, that becomes the chicken and the egg question. All I know is, their perception is their reality. What you can control is what you do in that moment. I think, because part of what you’re dealing with is perception and responding to it, I think it would be a really good exercise to try to get two or three people who you trust, who would be honest with you, and ask them for some very specific feedback. I can certainly give you some tips, but it would be in a vacuum. I can share that with you in a generic sense. But I think what you need to do is go back and validate what is it that’s actually happening in the room. That is probably going to give you the best plan moving forward. What are your takeaways from this conversation?
MICHELLE: Well, I think that making sure I speak less and ask more questions is a big one. And I need to try. Sometimes it feels like I need to be confident enough to not speak and let the other side talk more. I think that’s a big one for me. And then I’m trying to think of, what’s the right situation? Who are the right people to ask for feedback from that I can trust will be comfortable to be honest with me? Rather than feel uncomfortable, because I don’t want someone to feel uncomfortable. Those are the main things.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s a balance between you sharing your voice, sharing your opinion, having a point of view, getting your point across, which will demonstrate your credibility, which will enable you to lead with conviction and with confidence. And at the same time, being able to connect with others in a way that’s relevant to them. And that’s the piece that’s most critical here. Just because it’s important to you and relevant to you doesn’t mean it’s relevant to them. The whole point of connecting with others is making sure that we are speaking their language. And the only way we can do that is if we understand it. And the only way we can understand it, is if we actually listen to them. And so there strikes the balance. Okay, very good. Thank you, I appreciate you taking the time to do this.
MICHELLE: No, it was great. Thank you. I really learned a lot. I really appreciate this.
MURIEL WILKINS: There we have it, Michelle realized that a necessary piece of demonstrating leadership is having the confidence to listen. And that by doing that, she’ll better connect and engage with those she leads. She also recognized that other people will always have their own perceptions of you, and rather than focus on what they can do differently, she needs to look at what she can do to have them experience her differently, especially as she leads her new company. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
SPEAKER 1: The hurdles are trying to make sure I understand the work that I need to do versus the work that I take on. I’m a little too good at taking on work because I know I can do it, and I’m kind of a fixer.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; assistant producer, Liz Sanchez; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 8: How Do I Get Sponsorship Support?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime executive coach, who works with highly successful leaders who have hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump, by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone will call “Krish,” to protect her confidentiality. She works in a big consulting firm and has been in the consulting industry for over 10 years. She leads a global team and is responsible for their projects and success, as well as maintaining client relationships. So basically, she has to be effective both internally and externally.
KRISH: I draw strength mainly with working with people, that’s my core strength. I understand people. I can judge someone, their personalities, their perspectives. Where I lack is my confidence.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Krish” is concerned about her career trajectory. She’s been in her role for a while and wants to move forward, but isn’t. She’s on the precipice of the next level in her career, which at her company typically takes at least three or four years to get to, but she’s worried something is holding her back.
KRISH: I don’t know how to tell my own story, because I really self-sabotage myself, because I downplay the things that I’m doing. And I sometimes don’t recognize my own success, I guess. I don’t know how to go and ask them that, “I want to do this, and this is what my expectation is.” And that’s the thing I struggle with. And I think that’s what they’re looking for, but that’s where I think I need to learn to just be brave and go and ask for it. Which I still haven’t figured out how to do, because you are not there to represent yourself. You’re making sure that your sponsors are strong enough, they know your story well, and they go and represent you. The trouble that I have is building that sponsor list.
MURIEL WILKINS: She wants to meet all the criteria for reaching the next leadership level. And one important piece of that, she’s been told, is finding sponsors who can help tell her story, and by doing so, advocate for her next role. I started the conversation by asking her about her career ambition and aspirations.
KRISH: There are two goals. One is to lead a global team, and big complex projects, and the other one is leading a team successfully. The reason I say that, people lead is one of my core skills. I work well with people, I think I know enough about the platform and the practice that we are running. So, that area seems like one of the things that I’m strong at. So that’s the reason that I want to lead that. And also overall, being in the firm for so long, I’ve had enough experience, I know enough people, and I think I can, well, I know I can lead that practice well.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s the prognosis in terms of you making partner?
KRISH: So, I recently started, I hadn’t put down this on paper, but it was all in my head. And at some point I figured I should probably start planning this, because this is a long journey and this is going to take some planning. So I started creating this Excel of things that I need, like the goals that the firm requires, and what I check against, so I started adding all of those. The things that I’m lacking are two areas: one is where I don’t have enough supporters or mentors, the second is the big revenue. The big revenue is still possible, that once I get on a project it’ll still work out. The other one which I really struggle with, is getting the sponsorship. And also, I don’t know if this is the case, but as I see overall, even in our leadership calls and other calls in the firm, more and more number of senior managers and associate directors are women. Like if there are 30 people that are about four or five of them. I have a lot of mentors, I talk one on one to a lot of mentors. But getting that support and getting that sponsorship, is the struggle that I have right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you think is contributing to your struggle of getting that support, getting that sponsorship?
KRISH: Yeah, so a few things. I self-assess myself most of the time, and I think that sometimes doesn’t help either, because I self-sabotage a lot. Because I over think, maybe I’m not good at this, maybe I need to wait it out a bit more, or maybe I should… There’s a lot of things I always debate in my head, and I think I self-sabotage my own chances sometimes. The other thing is how do I… I talk to my mentors, I talk to them, I ask them about, “What should I be doing, where should I go?” But I don’t know how to have that conversation about, “Will you go and tell my story? This is my story, do you know me?” How do I articulate or how do I put forth, “Can you take this and tell my story to the firm that I could be successful, I could do this”?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what is your story?
KRISH: Good question. So, my story is that, so I have to prove that I do bring in value, I add value to the firm overall. And in a way, I have to sell myself. And that’s also sort of a struggle for me, but the way I think about it is overall from my past experience, I’ve been with the firm for about 10 years. And overall, every project that I’ve done has spanned over 30 million year on year. Other than that, I could talk to a CDO, I could talk to a CFO, I could work with the clients that do the roadmap. That value is very hard to come by in the firm, and having someone on their side would benefit them. That’s my story, sort of.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so let’s take a step back because I’m hearing a lot here and I just want to make sure I have it all. So, you have a clear stake in the ground that you want to become a partner.
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: It Doesn’t sound like you’re like, “I’m not sure if I want to be partner,” it sounds like you are like definitively, “I want to make partner.” Okay, great. Because that’s first, right? You got to be decisive about these things.
KRISH: Yes. Oh, definitely. That’s what I learned first from everyone.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. It’s like, don’t go through the process if you’re not sure.
KRISH: Yeah. And the other thing that I learned was, they’re like, “You should go and tell everybody that you want to be a partner, because they might just think you don’t want to be one.” I’m like, “Oh, okay. I’ll go tell everyone.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Exactly, shout it from the mountain tops. Okay, so first is you want to be a partner. Part of your challenge is you feel like you don’t have, as you called it, your tribe. People who will tell and amplify your story, which is very important in a particular, it’s important everywhere, but it’s certainly important in a professional services firm. Because you tend to work project-oriented, you need others to tell the other parts of the firm, partners who might not work with you, who you are, what you do and how you bring value. So, you’re looking for that tribe. And then you said part of the reasons you feel you don’t have that tribe or that sponsorship, is because you aren’t quite sure around what the story is that you need to tell them, so that they can tell your story.
KRISH: Yeah. I do struggle with framing my story, I think that’s part of the struggle, so yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m a believer in let’s go back to the fundamentals, and let’s work on level one before we get to level two, that then gets to level three. So, I would suggest if it’s okay with you, that we focus on the story that then positions you to be a good candidate for partnership. Because without that, you can go out and try to get your tribe, but when it comes down to like, “Okay, well, why should I sponsor you?” You’re going to be like, “Not sure.” And I don’t want that to happen.
KRISH: And I think when I speak also, I think that my self-doubt comes out so obviously because I use words, “I think, I know, maybe.” I’m trying, but it’s just still there somewhere.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. No, absolutely. And you said something important, which is when you name the three things that are necessary to become partner, you said, “I need to have a story, I need to have sponsorship, and I need to have sales,” so it’s like the three S’s. So tell me again, you ran through it again, but I just want to, let’s just role play here. Let’s say I’m a big partner at the firm, you’re getting a chance to spend a couple minutes with me. And I say, “So Krish, what’s going on, what’s on the horizon for you? What are you thinking around? What’s next for you?”
KRISH: What’s next for me is, I think being in the firm what’s next for me? Let me clarify, actually. What’s next for me, from the sense that what do I want to do next in the firm? Or is it the project, or is it like basically what do I want, open ended?
MURIEL WILKINS: I will leave it open-ended, but I’m going to come back to this in a few minutes.
KRISH: Okay. Let me back up and re-answer that. So what’s next for me is I want to take up a large project, that’ll help me build my story and help me meet my revenue and sales number. So that way, I can tell a story and be successful for my next step in my path.
MURIEL WILKINS: May I give you a little bit of feedback here?
KRISH: Yes, of course, please.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes? Okay. I think part of the issue here is that you’re aiming to be partner, but you’re speaking from a project orientation. Even when I said, “Hey, what’s next for you?” And I left it very open ended, you had a little bit of confusion and hesitation around should I be talking about my project, or should I be talking about what’s next for my career? And my answer to you would, well, who’s sitting in front of you? And what I had told you is you’re talking to a big partner who has influence on your career, and who probably oversees a gazillion projects. And so your discernment has to be, I need to speak to that person at the level at which they’re at, which is broader than a project. So that’s number one is, can you shift gears from thinking about yourself, and then speaking about yourself at the micro level of the project, and shift to thinking and speaking about yourself as a firm leader, which is what a partner is?
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so when I say that, would you have changed your answer in any way?
KRISH:I probably would have. I would have first asked what the firm’s goals are, what the priorities are for the next year, how are they aiming towards building their revenue growth in a certain area? And focus on trying to, and ask them if they I could lead that part of the practice or part of the project.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so you said you would ask those things, right? Is that something that you already have knowledge about, or confidence about, or not?
KRISH: Sort of at the high level, but I think that’s what probably everybody knows, I don’t know if they know any better.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I think, here’s the thing: what we need to shift you from or transition you from, is telling your story based on the position that you’re in now. You need to start telling your story around what the possibility is of what you will bring to firm if you are a partner. So, when somebody is deciding whether you should be a partner or not, they’re basically placing a bet on the future return. It’s like buying a stock, it’s like investing.
KRISH: Yes, that’s exactly what it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I can’t look at the stock just for what it is now. I’ve got to look at the stock and say, what’s going to be the future value of the stock? What’s the net present value? I remember a little bit from finance, many, many moons ago. But I don’t look at it for what it’s now, and I’m interested in it because of doing right now, I’m interested in it because of what I see for the future. And so when you think about the value that you can bring in the future, the way you make it relevant is making sure that it’s tied to future business goals. Which is why I asked you, do you have a clear sense of what the future goals of the firm are, right?
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you don’t, you’re going to have a very hard time telling your story. You can tell a story, but it’s not going to be a story about why you’re a good candidate to be a partner. You need to go on a mission, an information gathering mission that goes deeper than the goals that are written on the website or on the posters. Leverage your mentors to say, “Hey, where do you see the firm in five years? Where do you see the firm in…” Five years is a good number. And what is it that’s going to lead to that? And then you can start figuring out where do I fit in that picture?
KRISH: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. What “Krish” realized right from the start of our coaching conversation, is that if she wants others to support or better yet sponsor her, they need to know why they should support her. And that why is framed on what she can bring to the firm in the future, not just what she’s doing now. The simple, yet impactful reframing helps “Krish” understand that this is really about making the business case for herself. It’s about getting the senior leaders at her firm to have confidence that they want her at that table, that she’ll help grow the pie. But in order to do that, she’ll also need to have confidence in herself, which is something she struggles with.
KRISH: I’ve gone to my mentors and asked them about certain leadership roles that are open and granted I may not have all the experience that I need, but nobody else does too. So I asked them, because I said I could ramp up, I could learn, I could take that role and I know I’ll do well. But still that hesitation of confidence, I don’t know if I am not showing confidence enough to take that role on, or if a leader comes and asks, like if my partner comes and asks me, “Are you sure you want to take this?” I should probably say, “I know I will, and I will succeed,” right? And I think that’s the problem, that I sometimes say I might need some more experience or, I don’t know, I think my confidence also comes in the way sometimes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So have you ever seen, I can’t believe I’m even talking about this, but have you ever seen that show
Shark Tank
?
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You can feel, I mean, sometimes I imagine I’m one of the sharks, you can feel when somebody doesn’t even have confidence in their own business. And they don’t invest, they will not invest. And so if you don’t believe you can pull your weight, why should any of the partners believe that you can pull your weight? You might have one or two who can, who are like, “Yeah. I believe in you, I believe in you, I believe in you.” But as you said, you have to have more than one or two who have that confidence. And I’m glad you’re able to recognize that in yourself, and we can go back to that metaphor of picking stocks or investing in a business. Would you invest in yourself?
KRISH: Yes, I think that’s the part, I need to believe and invest in myself. I have this notion that I want to grow, but I haven’t internalized it that much to push myself towards it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What do you feel you need to be able to internalize it?
KRISH: I need to go back and write down all my achievements. I think looking at it, what I’ve done, what I’ve achieved, will help me understand that I do have enough experience, and I shouldn’t doubt that I could do whatever I’m aiming to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you think about what experience you need, what metric are you using? What are you using as the point of comparison to determine whether you have it or not?
KRISH: Good question. I don’t have a metric. There is no metric, it’s just, I don’t know actually—
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, that can leave it feeling like it’s just a moving target. And I don’t know about you, but a moving target is very hard to get wrap your arms around, and feel like you’re solid and grounded in what you’re doing. So, one of the things that I think might be helpful for you is to talk to some new partners. Because what it means to be a new partner, it’s not like you become a partner and then year one, you’re expected to be like the person who’s been a partner for 15 years.
KRISH: Yeah, that’s right. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s an onboarding to even being a partner. Once you become a partner, that’ll be our next coaching session.
KRISH: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: But it would be helpful to understand, what are the expectations even in year one? So that you know what that metric is for yourself. That’s what you have to believe is like, do I think I have what it takes to be able to succeed in year one? At the very least.
KRISH: Yeah, that’s a good idea.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because we’ve been talking about it in generalities, like partner, partner, partner, and then it’s like, well, what does that actually mean? And then once you find that out, then I think you can go back and look at your track record, and look at your experience. And line it up side by side, you’re putting them side by side to be able to say, “Does my experience to date, position me, well position me, to be able to meet the expectations of a first year partner? Is it moving in that direction, or is it moving in a completely different direction?” Then the next question is, where’s the gap and how big is it? It’s, “Directionally, am I moving in the right direction? And then what’s the order of magnitude between where I am and what’s expected?”
KRISH: Got it, okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then the process to get there, your story’s going to be your story. The comparison is like the stealer of joy. So it’s not comparison to say, I’m competing with this person, everybody has their own trajectory. And there is something to be learned by other people’s trajectories. So you can certainly still learn about, well, how did they do it? How did they do it? And then say, “Oh, what are the things that could work for me?” Learn from it. I think looking at others, as long as you’re learning and growing from it, is fine. If you’re looking at others, so that then it makes you feel worse about yourself, or it’s like, “Well, I can’t do that,” then don’t compare. Don’t compare. Something that I say is, look at others for inspiration, not for intimidation. And that is a mindset, right?
KRISH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you look at others for inspiration, what does that mean?
KRISH: You look and learn basically, and not judge yourself over it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then intimidation is like, “Oh my God, I can’t do that.” Okay, so let’s pull back a little bit. Because I think that this is really about you being able to tell your business case. And when you tell your business case, you are basically sharing how you will help grow the firm. Remember, I talked about increasing the pie. And so, what are the ways that you think, you believe you can help grow the firm? Well, let me even back up a little bit before you answer that. Let’s take it away from you. What are the ways, what are the levers to grow the firm?
KRISH: There are two main levers for sure, and there may be others, but the big ones are definitely helping the client. So bringing in a client and growing with them, is definitely on the top two. Which also, sort of adds to it, to grow your client’s revenue, there may be several levers that you can use.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I want you to stay at that level of altitude in terms of the levers. And so, you have client growth, which equals revenue. What other levers are necessary to grow the firm?
KRISH: Practice or skills growth. So if there’s a new technology, then making sure you have those skill sets and practices within the firm, so you can be ready, be there to help out and invest in the client. It’s funny because when I hear it from you, it makes a lot of sense. Because now when I look at it from an outside perspective, what’s my story, I understand why I’ve been struggling. Because most of my projects I deliver, I’m done, I’m moving on. But I think staying, growing the account actually really helps. And I need to focus more on that area as well. It amazes me that I already knew the answers, but it just didn’t come in my head before that these are the things that I need to focus on more. And like you said, I was focusing more on the nitty gritty and not on the big picture.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think what you’re seeing is that your experience has to reflect the areas that are important for firm growth. And that’s how you should be prioritizing where you’re spending your time, because that’s what will position you as somebody who can be a future contributor to the firms.
KRISH: Yeah. This clarity, like you said, I was struggling in the weeds to figure out, oh, maybe if I do this project well… I should probably start looking at it in more of a bigger picture and how does it contribute towards the overall firm growth, rather than just this project or just this thing that I do?
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly, exactly. This is exactly it, when you talk about, “Oh, I’m doing this project,” that’s from your perspective. That’ll keep you as a great senior manager, because that’s what you’re expected to do as a senior manager. But it does nothing to position you as a partner. And so, the other thing that you’re highlighting is there’s a difference between sharing the result of your work and sharing the impact of your work.
KRISH: Yep. So result is very like, okay, I did this and this was the outcome, impact is this is how much it changed, like what did it impact outside? How did it increase the revenue of the client or their customers? How did it help them? Amplifying that overall result basically.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So result is, this is what happened. Impact is, and this is why it’s important. And so, even in what you’ve been articulating today, when you talk about what you’ve done with your project, et cetera, you tend to stop at the result. And so, you have to push yourself to what’s the impact? And if that impact could be amplified, how is that relevant, how is it important from the larger firm objectives? So, telling your story, telling your business case has to be grounded in what’s important for the overall firm?
KRISH: Okay, that helps a lot. I’m glad that I can revisit this again and again.
MURIEL WILKINS: Until you get so bored, you’re like, “I don’t want to hear Muriel anymore.” Yeah, start at the macro. Understand what the business objectives are, then you can start saying, “Okay, what am I doing? Am I aligning myself with those business objectives?” And if there are areas where you are, great. If there are areas where you’re not, then that’s where you need to do the work. And what you want to articulate for yourself is, “What are the leading indicators that demonstrate that I can eventually contribute at that partner level?” So if I ask you now, and we’re not role playing here, but if I ask you now, how will you help grow the firm in the future?
KRISH: I want to invest in areas, certain areas that I know that are capped currently in our skill set. Invest in our people, grow the people, and also help some of our clients grow in that area. Build a practice so we can go and propose, and show the value of where we can grow in those areas for our clients. So I would grow them in that area, in that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, let’s take that as the foundation for your story. And we’re not going to get there today in terms of having a fully crafted story, but I’m just going to give you some, we’ll go through it so that you can walk away with some suggestions that you might want to incorporate. So, one suggestion I have for you is not only having your starting point in terms of thinking about the overall objectives of the firm. But when you actually start articulating it, meaning you’re talking to people about it, you want to even communicate it starting with the overall goals. So, what does that look like? If I were to ask you, “So Krish, what are you thinking about the future for yourself?” Or even if I don’t ask you, because you’re just going to tell people, you’re not going to wait to be asked, we’ll get there. You start your answer with, “When I think about what are the biggest contributions to firm growth, there are two areas I think of. One is client growth, and the other is people capabilities growth. So in terms of client growth, I see myself as an expert in X, Y, Z, that can help grow the revenue,” and you go deep into how you can do it. “And then from people capabilities growth, this is where I see I can add value, and here are examples of how I’ve done it, and my plan for how to do it in the future.” So it’s a top down, rather than a bottoms up.
KRISH: Yep, that helps a lot. I think this kind of sums it up a lot, about how you speak as an executive versus how you’re talking as a delivery leader, or not an executive.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s exactly it, you’ve got to switch your hat. You’re so used to wearing the project management hat, and imagine that’s like a little fedora, and now you’re wearing a sombrero. It’s a big sun hat, it’s broadened, so your perspective has to broaden to, “No, now I’m speaking about it, I’m making the link between what happens at the project level to how it contributes to the firm level. And then I’m able to show how I can make that leap from project to firm.” It’s not easy, it takes a lot of iteration to get there, but it’s possible.
KRISH: Yeah. I think it’s the mindset. The sooner I can change my mindset and start thinking about it in a big picture, in a big impact way. I think the sooner I’ll probably be able to articulate it a little better.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s stop here for a moment. “Krish” started the conversation by wanting to focus on how she tells her story so that she can get sponsors. But as our coaching discussion progressed, she realized that before she can tell the story that would position her for partnership, she has to shift her mindset to align with that goal. She has to think differently about what she brings to the table, get her head out of the weeds, and have more clarity on what she’s aiming for. Only then can she focus on taking action and asking for support.
MURIEL WILKINS: I would encourage you to take it from, there’s mindset and then there’s execution. And the execution is, I would start putting pen to paper. And it doesn’t matter what you write down, but start with, or whiteboard it. Here are the levers of growth for the firm, what does it look like for a partner to contribute to those levers? And now, oh, what does it look like for “Krish” to contribute to those levers? That’s future “Krish.” And where is current “Krish,” and where is she already demonstrating those things, and where does she still need to do some work? And if she still needs to do some work, what’s the action plan? So, first start with, you got to map it out. And then you can take it to, “Oh, okay. So how do I tell that story?” Well, “That story is here’s what I know what’s important for the business. Here’s what I’ve proven I can do that will contribute to the business, and how I plan to continue to contribute.” And if there are areas that you still need to strengthen, “Here’s how I’m going to strengthen those things, so that I’m ready to contribute at this level.”
KRISH: Okay, makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, mindset then execution is put pen to paper, map it out. And then it’s delivery, you’ve actually got to say it. And we already talked about saying it top down.
KRISH: Yes—
MURIEL WILKINS: …Yeah, in what way?
KRISH: Both in just getting clarity on what are the things that I’m missing? Because I’ve been really struggling with trying to figure out where my… I couldn’t figure out what my struggle was, because I don’t know where I’m lacking. I have the experience, I have the skill set. I’m like, why is it such a difficult task for me to convince anyone that this is my story? But I think when you put it this way, telling that top down story makes a lot of sense. I’ll definitely give that a try and see.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, and you might want to try it out with some of your mentors. And tell them what you’re doing, and ask them for feedback. So, one of the things that you said earlier on, is that you have not necessarily gone out there and said, “I want to be partner.”
KRISH: Yeah. So initially I didn’t, but lately at least with my mentors, I’ve tried to make it clear that I want to make it to partner. But here’s the thing: make it to partner is one thing, setting like one year, two year, five year, that duration, I think I haven’t been more specific that in the next year or in the following year, that I want to make partner. And they’re like, “Oh, that’s fine. In five years, you’ll make it.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I would encourage you, and this highlights what we just talked about. I think the next step is for you to say, “Okay, if my goal is to make a partner in,” two, three, four years, whatever that trajectory is, “What does that action plan look like for me?” For you, for “Krish.” And so, why is that important? A, because then you know what you need to work on to get there, and B, it’s something you can actually take to your mentors and have them react to in two ways. They can react to it by saying, “I don’t know, I don’t think that’s really what’s going to get you there,” or “Yes, it is,” so in the actual content of your plan. The other way, the second way that they can react to it is whether or not they can help you in any of those areas. And you can ask, that’s where the ask comes in, “So this is what I’m doing.” So when you say, they’re like, “Oh yeah, that’s nice. Five years, you want to make partner. Hey, good luck.” The reason they’re responding that way, is because usually people don’t know how to help you until you tell them, “This is how you can help me.” So if they don’t know what your action plan is, it’s going to be very difficult. Every now and then you have the unicorn who lands, and is like, “I can help you,” but most times you’ve got to ask for it. You’ve got to advocate for yourself.
KRISH: Yeah. I need to learn how to advocate better for myself. I think I do it a little bit, but like you said, I don’t have a perfect clear map, or a plan on what are the areas that I need to actually seek help from? I have been generally seeking, asking help from my mentors on what should I do, where should I go? But I think I should have it more focused, and build a plan and map it out. That’ll probably help me and them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I feel like you are coming to the table, going back to the
Shark Tank
analogy, you’re coming and asking for money. And then one of the sharks says, “What’s your plan?” and you’re like… Or they always ask, “Well, how do the economics work? What are your margins?” It’s like, ah…
KRISH: I’d be shut down in three seconds.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think for you going back to even taking this word story out of it, because I think that’s tripping you up a little bit, and thinking about it as your business case, what is your business case for this firm? Would make it much more practical, and tactical, and action-oriented, in a way that you could then translate into conversations that hopefully will then lead to you building your tribe, building that sponsorship.
KRISH: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right?
KRISH: Yep, thank you so much, Muriel. It was really, really helpful. Yeah, I didn’t know how far we’ll get in the short session, but it was incredible. Thank you for helping me.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Where’s your confidence level now, compared to when we first started?
KRISH: My confidence level is, it’s going up a little bit, you can see it rising. But I think as I start working towards the things you’ve told me, I’m sure I’ll probably be able to articulate my story, or my business case a little better. I do have a lot of homework to do I think, coming out of this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And because I get the sense that your confidence level rises as you see results, I’m going to ask you, what is one thing you can commit to doing in the next week that will bring you closer to having your business case solidified for why you should be a partner?
KRISH: I think there’s two things: one, I need to find the business revenue growth areas. And the other one is building that map and action plan. I think those two will definitely help me, put me in that trajectory to work towards my goal better.
MURIEL WILKINS: Good, good, good. All right. Well listen, thank you so much, “Krish,” appreciate this conversation and I wish you the best of luck.
KRISH: Thank you. Thank you so much, it was a pleasure. It was really a pleasure talking to you, and getting that advice was really helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sponsorship is such an important element of career progression, but it is not a passive endeavor. Like “Krish,” you have to put in the work. Know your business case and how it ties to your organization’s overall objectives. Share it with those who are in a position to advocate for you, and ask for their support. It takes focus and commitment, but with the right effort, it can pay off in dividends.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter @murielmwilkins, or on Instagram @coachmurielwilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 8: The Problem with Always Being the Problem Solver
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Charlie” to protect his confidentiality. He works for a large company and has mainly led large-scale technology projects or handled mergers and integrations, which means he’s very good at solving complicated problems.
CHARLIE: My day-to-day is a lot about actually trying to define and manage the requirements and push the progress of the program. So I have quite a variety of duties over what I really should be doing. And that’s a battle, and this is where I come your direction is to try and get somebody who can help me build a skill set to manage that better and also manage my thinking on how to structure my career.
MURIEL WILKINS: When it comes to prioritizing and figuring out how to best add value, that’s where he wants to continue growing as a manager and leader. And Charlie admits he doesn’t always know where to begin when it comes to developing those skills.
CHARLIE: It would be easier for me to then get myself organized to reach goals that I’m trying to define. It’s like I’m not looking to have 50 people reporting to me. I’m looking to be a better person and do a better job and then expand my skills in my job and become a resource for the company. My inclination is never to let somebody fail, and that’s one of the things I’m being told I have to stop doing, and that’s just hard for me. I care about people and I think that the managerial side of it’s management of me as well as outwardly.
MURIEL WILKINS: I started our conversation by hearing more about what Charlie sees as the stumbling blocks he’s facing and why he wanted coaching in the first place.
CHARLIE: So in the last two years, I’ve fought a battle, and in the last year it was really a very big battle to make sure that my job description matched what I did. I had two different job categories I was held to, but I wasn’t assessed by any criteria. I was just idling along, working really, really hard, having a lot of responsibility and watching other people on the team promoted. And then when I started voicing that, I’m like, “Well, what am I doing here?” I was told by my manager, “Well, I don’t know what to do with you, so I’m not going to do anything.” So that battle, I took it where I could to HR and I said, “Look, I don’t know what to do here. I could leave tomorrow. I don’t want to. I really like the mission and the work I do, and it’s the right job for me and my career I feel at this time, but I’m willing to take on more responsibility in a broader scope.” So the hurdles, I think, are trying to make sure I understand the work that I need to do versus the work that I take on. I’m a little too good at taking on work because I know I can do it. I’m a fixer. When my wife and I were getting married, we met with somebody and the person had known us a little bit and he said, “Ah, you’re the fixer in the relationship.” And that’s who I am. I like to engineer things and fix things. Some people say that’s good, some people say that’s bad. So examples would be we needed to create metrics and an entire team failed to do it. And finally, the architect turned to me, he’s like, “We have to report progress.” He’s like, “Can you do this?” “Sure.” So I spent the better part of the year now doing the work that should have been done by the technical leads. We had a real problem with a resource, and it turned out to be a battle between my boss and I. And so that hurt me, I was told because even though I was advocating for the health of the project and for the resources to push the project forward, I was told I paid a price for progression. The problem is I’ve been fighting this for two years now. Now it’s like the clock is reset for this year and it’s just not fair to me when I have awards, an exemplary record, I’m given compliments by people outside of my realm because when they have a question, I’ll stop what I’m doing or get them to the resource who can answer the questions. And I think that’s just the good corporate responsibility. I’ve actually been told not to do that, and I’m like, “That doesn’t make sense.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Told not to do that by whom?
CHARLIE: By my immediate leadership.
MURIEL WILKINS: By your immediate leadership, okay. So just to take a pause here, just to make sure I’m understanding, first, you’re feeling as though, at least for the past couple of years, your activities or the things that you’ve been involved with, your scope of work is not necessarily matching up with your job description. So you’ve gone over and beyond scope. And secondly, the reason you’ve gone over and beyond scope was seeing a need for things that needed to be quote, unquote, “fixed” and needs that weren’t being met, which on the one hand, sometimes can be seen as leaning into the white space and being opportunistic and demonstrating value. And on the other hand, again, correct me if I’m wrong, it sounds like the feedback you got was you don’t need to be involved in that and that it actually somewhat backfired on you.
CHARLIE: It’s pretty close. I mean, and part of it I was asked to do and then not given credit for it, but there is that leaning into that outside of the scope, which I do have to figure out how to stop doing that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if you were to articulate six months from now how you would like things to be different for you, what would the difference be?
CHARLIE: I’d like to have a bit more vision into where I’m going, feeling like I have more an ability to use the power that I have in my role and to be able to plan for myself. I’ve just been in this reactionary phase for two years. I’d like to move from very high level contextual switching all day long to a more planned set of activities that I can actually really do a good job on instead of just making sure everything’s done for everybody all the time, that I start to build a better career plan and I actually have the time to do training. Dimensionally, there’s a lot to learn, and so I’m just not given the opportunity or the time now.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so going back to I asked you a couple minutes ago, what were the hurdles that you identified as holding you back? And you articulated this notion of being a fixer, others from leadership who maybe had different expectations around what you should be doing. Was there anything else that you’ve identified as a hurdle?
CHARLIE: Sure. How I reacted to it, I think, with the resource that was not performing. I was just not able to let it go. And I think it’s because I’m a very protective person by nature and the injustice I saw of this person not working and myself and a lot of other people on the team doing a lot of extra work. I think having better perspective on that is something I need to develop.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so talk to me a little bit about that. What did that look like? What does not letting it go look like for you?
CHARLIE: Well, I was trying to be the fixer and I was trying to fix it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. There’s a theme.
CHARLIE: There’s a theme, yes. I was trying to fix what somebody else should have been accountable for and the response was often, “Don’t worry, there’s a process. Don’t worry. Don’t worry. Just ignore it.” And I just couldn’t. Most of the year that was really a lot of friction within the team trying to adjust and deliver and work around. And that to me, I would come home and I would just be so upset about it and I just was like, “I don’t know what I’m doing wrong.” Those things just weighed on me.
MURIEL WILKINS: So Charlie, help me understand when you’re not the fixer. What does that look like?
CHARLIE: I try to be an active participant in things. So right now I’m building out a significant program around what we’re going to do, and it’s complicated. So I’m not the fixer, I’m the builder, but I can’t get people to adopt it. So some people have jumped in, they see the value of it. I’ve got some great eager people, and then I have some people in leadership who are part of this. They’re leading things underneath the program, and I can’t get the time of day out of them. Well, I have nowhere to escalate that. So I’m not the fixer, in a way, here, but I’m really trying to push this effort forward that I’m building as the main part of my job, and I am falling back into that fixer stance where it’s like, “Well, okay, I’ll just update the documents for you,” or “I’ll fill the gaps.” As another technical project manager told me, “I’ll be the spray foam. I’ll fill the gaps for you.” And this person was kind enough to say, “You shouldn’t do that. There should be the rigor. The leadership above you should be supporting you.” And that’s where it gets kind of soft. I don’t have that leadership.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so when you get that feedback or you get that suggestion from some of your colleagues, “don’t be the spray foam,” which I love that visual, how does that resonate with you?
CHARLIE: That’s really my struggle. A friend of mine gave me a great quote from her husband, which was, “Don’t blow yourself up.” And I actually have drawn and put on my monitor a little old fashioned time bomb with a lit fuse that says, “don’t blow yourself up.” So I look at that because that’s where I go to. I don’t know how to handle it. I don’t know what the right reactions are. I have in my mind, it’s like you click into fixer mode and away you go. You grab your tools and you attack it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Charlie initially reached out because he wants to grow as a leader, but in his words, he doesn’t know what he doesn’t know. As we begin our conversation though, he really zeros in on the idea of being the fixer. I’m getting the sense that he’s struggling trying to navigate priorities day-to-day, but that he doesn’t quite get why he’s struggling so that he can address it. So before we can look at what options he has, I first need him to really realize what being a fixer is doing for him, and then explore what other ways he could approach the challenging situations that he faces. So I think a part of what’s happening is there is a lot of value in being a fixer, and it is what has really followed you through your whole career, even in the profession that you chose and the interest that you’ve had. It’s highly valued up until a certain point. I don’t think you should look at it as it’s bad to be a fixer. I think the question is, is a fixer the only thing that Charlie can be? What are the other muscles that you can also use so that you can be situational and adaptable to whatever context you’re in? I want to just do a little scenario planning, hypothesize, okay? We’ve established that you can be the fixer and there’s a lot of value, but as there is in anybody’s strengths, overused, it then has some negative consequences, which what I’m hearing from you is it doesn’t necessarily get recognized. It can lead to a lot of frustration, might not necessarily get the results that you want internally. Okay, so fixer is one option. I want you to think about maybe some of the situations you’re facing right now, and you don’t necessarily have to go into detail on them, but think about some of the situations you’re facing right now where you feel like you’re edging on being the fixer or maybe you are firmly in that. What other ways can you be in those situations?
CHARLIE: I mean, I think one option is truly to let somebody fail, I think. Or document what’s going on and pass that over and just let it sit. I also think not offering, but asking better questions. So if you’re late on a deliverable, “What are you going to do to fix it and just stop?” Because then I’m not being the fixer, I’m putting them in the position to be the fixer. I think some of these techniques I’ve seen, it’s just that it’s, for some reason, hard for me to adopt. One of the people I work with is also probably one of the most emotionally in tune people I’ve ever met and just has this wonderful sense about him and I envy him. And maybe that’s something I need to develop is that emotional maturity. He just doesn’t get excited about things he analyzes, “Okay, I’m good with that.” And I don’t know if it’s a pause to reflection on where you’re going to go or I need to figure out that pace for myself, I think. Does that make sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, it makes sense. And you’ve said a couple of things there. First of all, let me point out these options that you have. So what is great for you is that you actually can see what options you have. You just named them. On the one end of the continuum, action to take, fix it. On the other end of the continuum, let it go. Just like the movie or song, Frozen, right?
CHARLIE: Frozen, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s the other end of the continuum. And then there’s somewhere in between which you named as asking but not telling. And so maybe we can name that. Maybe it’s ask and not tell or coach and not direct. So maybe in the middle you’re the coach. So we have the fixer, the coach, and the let it go.
CHARLIE: Okay, yep. Three easy plays.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s a continuum, all right?
CHARLIE: Okay, yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so that’s your starting place is first recognizing that I can play a role that adds value beyond fixing something. The question then becomes when do I activate which role? And that’s the level that I want us to move to next, okay, so we’re going to get there. Before we do though, I want to comment on what you observed in your colleague who you said just seems to have a sense of maturity or looks at things analytically. And so what’s the energy that you get from that person. When you’re in their presence and they’re facing something, what’s the energy that you get?
CHARLIE: It’s actually a comforting discussion, and I’m always struck by how he’s been able to just be like, “Well, I don’t know what they’re doing.” He’s able to let it go, but he’s very in tune with what’s going on. He’s not dismissive, but is able to let it go in the sense of I’m not going to get emotional about it, but yet I’m going to devote some of my attention to keeping an eye on that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what you experienced in that point, you said there’s a certain… You were trying to name what it is, and I’m going to give you a name for it. It’s actually the ability to demonstrate what’s called equanimity. And equanimity, there’s a reason it’s equa, if you think about equal, is that basically no matter what’s happening, you have an equal disposition around it. And to take that a little further, what does that require? And the way you described it actually demonstrates this. It requires an awareness of what’s going on. So you’re not out of touch with reality. You’re not in complete denial of what the situation might be that the project might be going to hell, but you’re not so attached to it that it changes your disposition. And the attachment is when you start making meaning of what’s happening or start catastrophizing or start imagining things beyond your control that really are not going to be helpful in terms of you being able to make then, a decision around how do you act in this situation? Which brings us back to that continuum. “Okay, I’m aware of what’s going on. I’m not attached to being the fixer. I’m not attached to saving the day. What is the best course of action based on what is happening? Do I need to fix it? Do I need to just let it go and let it sit maybe for a certain period of time? Or do I need to engage more in a coaching type of way? Ask the questions, maybe provide some suggestions but not be directive.” So this notion of equanimity is about, at every moment, regardless of what’s happening around me, can I stay grounded so that I can have a clear view of what decisions I need to make?
CHARLIE: I can see when you’re saying this, I’m thinking to myself, “You’re so right about how I put an emotional stamp on things. I make an emotional connection to things that I don’t want to lose control of,” I think, is maybe the way to put it. In other words, maybe situational awareness. I feel too much ownership for the things in my situation. And what I hear you saying is maintain more of a neutral stance, but don’t let those things go, per se, over the horizon where I don’t see them or don’t know they’re there. And to maintain myself a little more constantly within that spectrum of let it go, fix it or advise and coach in the middle.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m just going to play back what you just said around this emotion that you bring into it. I also like to think around what is the charge that you give to the situation? It doesn’t have to have a charge, right?
CHARLIE: Yeah, that’s a good point.
MURIEL WILKINS: Part of what might be helpful for you is if you almost think about those being the three levers, we’re going to keep it simple. Obviously, there’s probably other options, but we’re going to keep it simple and give it as these three. What is the filter you can use to help you determine which lever to pull, the fix it lever, the coaching lever, or the let it go lever? What are some variables that can inform you as to which direction you should go in? And this is like just choosing, I don’t know if you play any sports, do you play any sports or do you like any particular sports?
CHARLIE: Yeah, I spend a lot of time skiing or motor racing. I mean-
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so skiing, okay. It’s been a long time since I’ve skied, correct me if I’m wrong, but you determine what your approach is going to be depending on the hill that’s in front of you or the slope that’s in front of you, on the snow conditions. There are a number of different variables that dictate how you’re going to approach skiing for whatever distance you’re going for. So it’s similar. So what are the variables that you need to take into consideration that will help you determine which of those three actions you can take vis-a-vis a situation?
CHARLIE: Well, so reading the terrain is basically the way I’m thinking about this. Is it a smooth hill that doesn’t slope much? Is it a hill that’s fairly smooth but really drops off or is it a drop off that’s full of moguls or is it just a long easy slide of a run, that would be the let it go? And so I’m trying to think how do I see terrain when I’m not skiing?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. One suggestion as to how you might want to look at it from a business perspective, this reading the terrain, which is exactly what you need to pause for. Remember you said part of the issue is you can become conscious of those, but what’s the timing around your reaction? And now we’re not talking about reaction because reaction is something happens, you react without thinking. What we’re moving now to is how do you consciously act, which requires you to actually consciously think about what your choice and decision is. When you go into fixer mode, you’re not always necessarily consciously deciding that you’re going to fix. That has been your default. Now we have different lanes that we can go in. So what do we have to do? Well, before you move lanes, you’ve got to pause and decide, do I move lane? How fast do I go? Is there a car? What’s the risk of me moving lane? How close is my exit? Do I need to move lanes quickly? So you are reading the terrain. And so two variables, just like I just described now in switching lanes is, asking yourself what’s the risk at hand? And let me caveat that by saying what’s the realistic risk, not the imagined risk, okay, what’s the realistic risk of what’s at hand? And secondly, what’s the level of urgency? And again, realistic urgency, not imagined, perceived level. Based on those two, level of risk, level of urgency, which direction should you go in?
CHARLIE: So the two filters, so to speak, are the risk and urgency.
MURIEL WILKINS: Those are two suggestions.
CHARLIE: Yep. No, they’re fitting. Those are app filters to think about.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what I want you to apply this now to is a real situation in your head and think about what other variables might help inform, beyond risk and urgency. So you could talk through the risk, the urgency. Are there other variables that you can take into consideration?
CHARLIE: Well, I mean, the urgency, I guess, equates to timeline and the risk here is not doing whatever it is. I guess the other thing possibly is how I’ll react. Would that be fair to say if I’m like, “Okay, if it’s a risk and urgency type assessment, am I going to be comfortable reacting or not?” I don’t know if that’s the emotional side of this. “Am I excited to jump into the slope of this hill or am I going to really just pause for a moment and find my way down through these things? Am I going to feel good about that? Or is it the rush of going down the hill that’s really why I’m there? I’m trying to equate that to this type of a scenario.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so the only thing I would ask you to think about there is remember that, up until now, the emotional comfort has been with fixing something-
CHARLIE: Which is the rush.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, so anything else that you do for now, by its nature, is going to feel uncomfortable and probably not going to feel good. So deciding, and this is a big component of leadership, is you have to get comfortable doing uncomfortable things because it will eventually lead to the better outcome. And so, using as a variable how uncomfortable it’s going to make me or how’s it going to make me feel within a certain boundary. Obviously, if it is against your integrity, ethics, complete value system, then maybe that’s the boundary. So we want to make sure that it is within a certain realm of how are we actually describing how do I feel about it?
CHARLIE: Got it. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: The other piece is what’s the level of control that you have?
CHARLIE: Well, that is a good point in that I don’t know that I feel like I always have control. I’m subject to things rather than being able to be, I don’t know if it’s directing or I feel accountable and responsible, but do I often have control? Probably not that often. So you’re trying to influence others to do the work and your control is really only over the output that you have to produce. So the control you have is limited to what influence you can generate.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a step back here. We’ve now established this need Charlie has to be the fixer, and some of that comes from the joy he gets from solving problems, but it also comes from his fear of things falling apart if he doesn’t swoop in and fix it. If he lets go a little bit and lets someone fail, what does that mean for his projects and his career? Quite frankly, so many of us are like Charlie at one point or another. We have knee-jerk reactions to fix and control out of fear of what might happen if we don’t. Rather than have the courage to make an informed decision about whether trying to fix or control the situation is the right path forward. So I need Charlie to really assess the risk he’s trying to mitigate by automatically moving to fix it mode. And what is the risk if he doesn’t? Do you believe fundamentally that you would ever let it get to a point where you’re not doing your job?
CHARLIE: No. No, I mean, but doing the job versus producing what’s expected of me become two different things because I don’t have the control to produce it. That’s where I get lost and that’s where I get anxious.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, well, but I think you actually just hit it right there. You just said doing your job is different than the actual producing of the full thing, right?
CHARLIE: It is.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like if I’m the brick layer of the house and I am responsible for laying the brick, yes, I have a vision for the house and I want the house to look great, but I’m going to hold the entire house construction as my doing.
CHARLIE: Right, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I need to be aware of that, but really, where I add value is-
CHARLIE: One brick.
MURIEL WILKINS: Making sure I’m laying the bricks, exactly. One brick at a time. And then I need to look at the roof guy and if the roof guy’s not laying down the roof right, I can’t go up there and… I mean I could, but there’s probably a risk in me doing that too. But I can raise the flag and say, “Hey, are you sure you’re putting down that roof right?” You can tell I don’t know a lot about construction, but-
CHARLIE: Well, you’re doing pretty well.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you get the drift. I’m doing okay?
CHARLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you get the drift.
CHARLIE: I do, yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I think that, Charlie, part of this is where do you find the intersection between being responsible and accountable for what’s within your line of control, what you’re empowered to do, what your day job is. Where do you find the intersection between that and the overall success of these multi-layered projects, initiatives, charges that you’re given? Because right now, it feels like it’s all or nothing, right?
CHARLIE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: But they’re not mutually exclusive.
CHARLIE: That’s correct, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So imagine a world where you are operating at the intersection of both. You’re not trying to save the whole dag on thing and you’re not just head down, head in the sand, just heads down focused on your thing and not paying attention to anything else. What’s the intersection? Imagine a world where you are able to operate at the intersection of both. What does that look like?
CHARLIE: That’s something I’d have to think about a bit. I think part of the struggle for me has been the lack of definition of the role and the amount of variety on a daily basis of what I had to do, deal with. So I am trying to steer it back to where I can set that reality that you’re describing up. So if I put myself there six months, as we talked about earlier, I think it would be where that intersection is a lot more around the comfort for me of knowing that I’m in the space functionally, so I’m able to execute on the plans that I’ve developed and then reign myself in when I see that there’s that slippage or influence that is pushing me toward either end of the spectrum, out of that functional role of advise and coach or however we want to term it in the middle there, and that I acknowledge that those filters that we talked about are in the right part of the meter or not. Like, “Okay, I, do I have enough control to get this done? Is it actually my responsibility? What’s the risk?” Those things I have to learn how to see and be comfortable with, I think. Is that the right way to think about it?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, you tell me.
CHARLIE: Well, it sounds to me like a workable system. It’s a matter of building the skills, I think, through exercise, the muscle memory, if you want to call it, but the mental muscle memory to say, “Time to stop for a second. Don’t go sliding down this hill because you’re going to get hurt. The risk is too high. The terrain, I can see it’s too bad, too icy, whatever. There’s too many winds. I can’t see through the glare.”“ And sometimes I think one of the problems I have is that I don’t stop to look far enough ahead. I’ve been in such a tight horizon that I don’t actually see the rest of the path. I’m not looking beyond my ski tips, which is my day, my ski tips the length of my day when I should be seeing out over those. I was taught to drive off road, and they teach you to do that by looking where you want to go in a corner and your hands will actually follow your eyes. So you might be sliding sideways, you might be accelerating and breaking at the same time. You’re using that momentum to get to the point that you’re consciously looking at, but you’re not thinking about all the other things you have to do that. I think I have to carry that kind of example into some sort of system when I’m confronted with one of these points. But the balance is what’s the risk? What’s the control? What’s the emotional context that I’m feeling, whether I’m connected to it or not. What’s the timing horizon for it mean? I mean, I think I’m seeing, from what you’re describing, something that’s actually very helpful. It’s going to require a skill to pause and think a little bit more, to reflect a bit, which I don’t give myself time to do when I have to learn how to do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so learning how to do that can be hard without practice. The practice of the pause is… Goodness gracious, I mean, we all had to feel the practice of the pause for the past year. But it really takes a conscientious effort to pause. I would ask, what are you willing to commit to over the next four to six weeks that would help you pause and go through this mental checklist and listen. I mean, this is requiring you to be patient with yourself.
CHARLIE: Yeah, it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: And maybe at the end of the day, that’s part of it, is your impatience to move ahead and fix things is reflecting the impatience to yourself. So what would it look like how you approach other things outside of you if you were more patient with yourself?
CHARLIE: How would it look? Well, I think things would go slower, but then I’m probably trying to get too much done anyway. I think there was a lot of value into me restructuring the role and the definition of the role for this coming year. And I think that’s giving me hope that I can actually work in a better manner. And I think I just have to magnify that. So if I sit on that for a second and I say, “Okay, to do this better, I need to be more mindful and I need to take these breaks and consider my filters or my assessment system,” I think that’s a good recipe.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, look, you’re not doing this just for the sake of doing it. It’s not like, “Oh, just be patient because patience is a virtue.” It’s exercise these things because you said that your desire and your goal was to be able to operate in a way where it doesn’t lead to as much frustration it doesn’t lead to you being so down in the weeds as much as you have been and can smooth out the experience that you have as you’re trying to deliver on your role and deliver on what’s good for the company. So we already know if you’re impatient and you try to fix it and you get caught up in that, what that leads to. And that runs counter to, again, what you said your goal is. And so this is tied into your goals. Your reason why is self-serving, and there’s nothing wrong with that so that you can reach the outcomes you want. That doesn’t mean that it’s not going to be uncomfortable. It doesn’t mean that it’s not going to be hard. It’s exactly what you said earlier, which is it requires some muscle memory, which takes practice, And it is a learning and building a different way of leading your work than you have done in the past. So the fact that it feels uncomfortable and is not going to come naturally to you and may cause some hesitation actually is a good sign because it demonstrates that you’re on the brink of doing something different than you have before.
CHARLIE: Yeah, it sounds exciting, frankly. I think having a wave of thinking about it is really important rather than just reacting to it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen, I think we have covered quite a bit, and I promised you I would say that it’s time to land the plane.
CHARLIE: All right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So that’s what we’re about to do. So I would love to hear what your takeaways are from this conversation. What do you commit to doing moving forward that will be of service to you?
CHARLIE: Well first, thank you. This has been really fantastic. I’ve really enjoyed it as well. I think my takeaways are to take a refreshing look at the way that I work and the way that I perceive things and to cut time out, commit to cutting time out and increasing that over time during my days to pause for some set of intervals and think about what I’m facing and when I’m facing those things, how do I assess them? I think part of it is that attachment to it. Am I attached or unattached? What is the the relative risk in reality versus those imagined risks? What is the threshold for time to deliver it? What control do I have? It’s more important about taking that pause for a second and really looking at things in a way that I end up not just reacting. Really assessing, “Well, if I don’t do anything with this, what happens? Is it really going to be a big risk if it fails, is it really going to be a problem for me in what I have to do in the scope of my work?” But also to be ready if it’s on the other end of the spectrum that I have to go into fixing it, is there a risk to be fixing it? Is this something that I truly have to fix or is it something that I can pull back toward the center and give guidance and advice on to let somebody else handle it? And what’s the measure of control that I have there?
MURIEL WILKINS: So I just want you to continue to keep that image of reading the terrain
CHARLIE: I will.
MURIEL WILKINS: And looking beyond the tips of your skis. And if you have a little picture that you could print out and put on your wall or laptop or whatever you look at every day, as a reminder, I think that’ll give you that reminder to pause. You came up with what the different actions and scenarios are, so those are muscles that are within you. Now, it’s a matter of building that muscle memory and actually practicing them and putting them into use, okay?
CHARLIE: Okay, yes. Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we began our coaching session, Charlie was struggling with seemingly external issues. Not having clarity around his position, feeling like he had to clean up after certain team members who were underperforming, and not feeling the support when he did so. Like often happens when I coach someone, I encouraged him to focus on the things within his control. Learning to prioritize isn’t easy as we move up the ladder. There’s comfort in the things we’re good at that have made us successful up until now. But if we want to level up and get to higher and higher levels of leadership, we have to learn to step back and focus on what matters. It’s important to first realize that fact, then take the time to practice patience, mindfulness, create the space to build perspective and have the courage to decide what to let go. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: So you get to this point where you can’t have the same level of depth that other people can reach, but at the same time, there’s an expectation of you need to show value. So you’re dealing with multiple industries where you want to still show value, but at the same time, you’re dealing with multiple personalities. So being in a cross-functional role, you have to understand each layer and how they are all playing together.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 9: How Do I Get My Confidence Back?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Jay to protect his confidentiality. He’s been at the same large company for over two decades, working his way up from a temporary position to a technical role, to a leadership position. He eventually got an MBA and he’s been looking to expand, to not feel so stuck pigeonholed into this one job at one company.
JAY: Around about five years ago, I realized after going for an interview with another company, I got to the very, very last stage of the position. And I was told at the end that because I was very specific in my learnings, that I had not experienced enough in the world.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jay is feeling a bit of crisis of confidence as he thinks about the next phase of his career, which for him is the goal to become a CIO.
JAY: Am I good enough? That’s I think the big thing, because when I first started off in this particular company, it was actually out of necessity to support my family. So, I really worked hard to actually be able to do my job well, and that just allowed me to go, “Keep on moving forward. Now that I’m in a situation that it’s not a necessity to constantly support my family in the sense that I’m financially okay, my biggest thing is what I’ve experienced in the past, especially with previous managers, where my self-esteem is actually not the best, and then so on, I don’t believe that I’m good enough to be able to take up the role.
MURIEL WILKINS: It was time to dig a bit deeper to see where he lost some of his self-esteem, and how it plays out in his work. Let’s dive into the conversation now, as I asked Jay about what he experienced with his previous boss and how it shook his confidence?
JAY: It was pretty bad because it was actually on the borderline of bullying, and so on. So had many situations where I’ve had this really serious confrontation and feeling that I was inadequate, even though I felt that I was more than diligent in my role. So, it wasn’t great to actually have that feeling, just always constantly thinking that you weren’t good enough.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what is it that made you feel like you weren’t good enough?
JAY: I was questioning everything. I was questioning my ability, I was questioning what I was doing. Every day, it was just a constant question like, “Am I good enough in it? Is this correct? Is this the way that he wants it?” So it was just constantly questioning, questioning your ability.
MURIEL WILKINS: And as a result of constantly questioning your ability yourself, what did that afford you? What did that allow you to do?
JAY: Well, not sure about that. I know that I became extremely anxious, but in the sense that it drove me to saying, “Okay, do I need to learn more?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
JAY: So, then there’s a point in time you just think, “Well, how much more do I need to learn?” And then so on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
JAY: But you become consciously anxious all the time because you just don’t know, you’re going to get a phone call at 3:00 AM because he’s not satisfied with what you’ve done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative) So your manager not being satisfied with what you’ve done led you to then believe that you weren’t good enough for the role?
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, how do you differentiate between somebody not being satisfied with the work, versus you at a personal level not being good enough?
JAY: I’m not sure how to answer that actually. I always thought I had the ability because I wouldn’t have initially got the role, but it was like, I felt that I wasn’t good enough to be able to get the next role. When opportunities came, I was never looked at as a potential person to take up that next role, where I thought other people who did have that opportunity and took it, were less technical and less able to be able to fill that role. And so, you start to feel, “Okay, you’re not worthy.”  So, there was this whole issue between me and the manager. It’s like he’s really dominating. He would basically ensure that he was always thinking that he was better than myself. So that made me feel, “Okay. I’m not adequate.” But the thing was that I love the role. I love the job, and that’s why I’ve stayed for so many years. And it’s not just loving the role. I love the people that I manage. So those people, I stayed very specifically for of those people. And I felt that I’ve done the wrong thing because I sacrificed myself for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’ve given up a lot, you feel like?
JAY: Absolutely, absolutely. Opportunities that have come and gone, and I look at it in this particular role that a Director. I’ve been in this position for seven years now. I haven’t applied for anything else. I’ve seen many offers come in on my desk. I’ve never taken it because I just didn’t feel that I finished what I needed to finish.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this aspect of not feeling good enough for the role, which then chipped away at your confidence, what would have made you feel like you were good enough?
JAY: Acknowledgement that the things that I had done, my projects, the accomplishments, being acknowledged for those particular accomplishments. And not like rewarded with pay rises or whatever, that wasn’t really my concern. It’s actually acknowledgement, acknowledgement that at the point in time that I finished it, that was very successful, and being presented with opportunities that would’ve allowed me to go further. But I sit here and I think, if I had that acknowledgement, I may have actually been a VP by now.
MURIEL WILKINS: And did you ever ask for feedback on what was missing-
JAY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Or what was at the source of the discontent?
JAY: Yeah, and try to work on those particular issues, and then so on, but still never got that opportunity.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative) Okay. Never got the opportunity from this one particular manager?
JAY: Sorry. I was just going to say, and it’s really interesting, that manager’s actually left.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, with your new manager, how’s that going?
JAY: It’s actually much better. There’s a very different methodology in his management styles. It was actually quite interesting the way that he responded to certain things compared to the previous manager, and I was actually quite taken back. I was actually stunned. I was like, “Oh my God. I’ve never experienced this in my life.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. One of the things that you just said, which is critical here is this is different.
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, why are you holding onto the same story that was formed under your previous manager when this is different?
JAY: I don’t know. The one thing is that I came to through reflection is that my self-esteem was so badly beaten, that I don’t know if I’ve got enough energy to be able to move on.
MURIEL WILKINS: We all hold on to, at some point or another, experiences that we’ve had that potentially then define how we react in the present.
JAY: Yes, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Good or bad. It’s like, think about your favorite restaurant that you’ve been to, and you hold onto that experience. You’re like, “Oh my God, it was so good. It was so yummy. The service was exquisite.” And you go back to that restaurant because you expect it to be the exact same experience, right? And hopefully it is, right? But sometimes it’s not, and the same happens on the negative side. And so, when we hold onto that, when we hold onto an experience from the past to make assertions about what’s going to happen in the present, what do you think it gives us or gives you?
JAY: Yeah. I’m not sure actually. Yeah. I think it’s just that the fact is that we think that it’s always going to be the same, as you said.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And if it’s the same, then what does it do for you?
JAY: You think all of it is going to be the same, it’s always going to be the same.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And when things are the same, when things are predictable, when we think things are predictable, what do you… I don’t know about you, but when you think things are predictable, how do you respond? How does it make you feel?
JAY: Well in this situation, it’s very hard to get up in the morning. It’s the same… Yeah. It’s very, very difficult to actually go through it every single day. So it’s predictable, you… Monday mornings are okay. Tuesday mornings are terrible because you know that, that’s when you’re going to interact with your manager and so on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. But you know what’s going to happen, right? Whether it’s good or bad. And when we know what’s going to happen, when we know with certitude, and I’m saying no, let me actually [inaudible 00:10:10] We know what’s going to happen with certitude, what it gives us is a sense of control.
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But it’s a fake sense of control. And again, good or bad. I had a client once whose manager was really, really tough manager. It sounds similar to yours, but my client said, “But you know what? He’s like predictably bad. So therefore…” He goes, “He’s so predictably bad as a manager, I can prepare myself.” But that’s a sense of control. That’s a, “I know what to do in that situation, whether I’m going to fight back or I’m going to just cringe and have these emotions, or whatever it might be.” You’re in a different situation now though. You’re with a different manager. And so does the behavior or the reaction, the feelings that you’ve had in the past, in what way do they even help you in this current situation?
JAY: Well, yeah. In regards to predictability, no, they don’t because it’s totally different manager. So it’s actually creating those new type of experiences, which has actually been quite different. Well, for me it’s been unpredictable because I wasn’t used to it. I’m not used to it, especially after being with a manager in that particular circumstances, to come to a different type of manager, it’s the creation of a whole new experience. It’s actually creating those new relationships again, and I don’t know how I feel actually, honestly. I don’t know if I’ve got the confidence at the moment, or I’m just going through this new phase of just getting these new feelings about how things are different, or have I actually been able to create the confidence to say, “Okay…” I’ve actually been able to create the confidence to say, “Okay, I can do not only my job, but I can also move on and do something different.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Taking it away from the situation, when you are confident about something, what is it that makes you feel like you’re confident?
JAY: That I have the knowledge to be able to do what I do, and I do it well. That creates the confidence that I… yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Having the knowledge to do something, and being able to do it well makes you confident, and when it’s something new and you don’t know if you are going to do it well or not, then how do you end up being confident about trying it?
JAY: Initially, it’s anxiety. A lot of it. But then it’s just basically learning it and learning it as quickly as possible and then mastering it, and that creates my confidence. When I’ve actually mastered it, that particular new technology or whatever, then the confidence is there. I know that I can do my job well.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, you have confidence around being able to do that, to learn something and master it, right?
JAY: Yep. Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And not surprisingly, because you’ve done it over and over and over again, which is what has led you to where you are.
JAY: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so what I want to highlight for you, Jay, is the difference between having confidence in your ability to learn and master something versus having confidence in that ephemeral, we don’t even know what it is yet, next role. One is about having confidence in the process and the other is about having confidence in the outcome, the actual destination. They’re closely linked, but there’s a difference between the two. And so when I say that to you, how are you interpreting it?
JAY: Well, I do agree that the fact is the confidence in the process. So from that perspective, I do agree because something that I’ve learned for a very long time. I realize that potentially for the last couple of years, I’ve actually lost that path, where I’m not actually going through the process that actually really worked well for me in the past. And so I haven’t actually built my confidence through the process. The other one is confidence in the outcome.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Let me use an example for you. I have a kid who plays competitive sports and if you’ve ever played a competitive sport, of course you want to win. But in reality, the only thing you can control is how you play the game, not necessarily the outcome. We’ve seen some of the most amazing athletes get on a court, get on a field, wanting to win. That’s the desired outcome, but they can’t really control the outcome because the outcome is in the future. The only thing they can control is what’s happening in the here and now, which is how they play the game. In your case, how you play the game is this learning and mastering what is necessary to increase the probability of you getting that next role. But it doesn’t guarantee that you will get the next role. So why place your confidence on something that’s a variable that’s not guaranteed, that can be a moving target, that may not even be fully defined yet? Place your confidence, your belief in yourself in the things that you can control. And so what are the things that you can control?
JAY: It’s the process.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s the process. You can’t control your manager. You can’t control other people. What they’re going to say, what they’re going to think. I mean, I don’t know if you can, let me know how you do it. We’ll be having a whole different conversation, right?
JAY: Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: But all you can do is control the things that are in your control.
JAY: Yeah, absolutely agree with that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jay’s in a tough situation here. His experience working with his previous manager impacted his view of himself and what he thinks he can accomplish. We make an important distinction at this point between having confidence in the outcome versus confidence in the process and effort. And by focusing on the latter, it brings him back to what is actually in his control, his effort. Let’s dive back in as I ask him, why has he given up the process that he knew worked for him and that helped him feel confident in the past?
JAY: I think you’ve brought up a really interesting point. I think for some unknown reason, I’ve abandoned the process, which was very successful for me early on. So I had a very critical process of making sure that I learned and understood whatever we were doing, but for some unknown reason, for the last five years or so, I’ve abandoned that process. And it’s just my confidence has diminished significantly.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would it take for you to pick that process back up?
JAY: I don’t think it’s much to actually pick it up. The fact is just going back and looking at how I did it in the past, and actually asking myself, “What am I not doing at the present that I did very, very successfully 10 years ago? Even five years ago, and I did it very well? Why is it that I’ve abandoned that particular process?” And get rid of that, get that out of my mind, why I did it, and just go back to actually saying, “Okay, I just need to go through this process of actually mastering what I need to master.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, look, I think part of when you have a crisis of confidence, part of what is very helpful is to look at your track record. What have I been able to do? And understand where that came from, where it led you to, and to what extent could whatever that is be helpful to you today. Why you didn’t do it, I mean, I don’t know. Why do I sometimes wake up and not work out, even though I do it pretty consistently and then it turns into a week or two weeks of not working out? I don’t know. Maybe I’m tired. Maybe I’ve lost my mojo. Maybe it’s like, “Where is this getting me?” I mean, there are a number of different reasons why we momentarily or permanently give up on something.
JAY: Yeah. I think from what you actually just said a moment ago, your mojo. And I actually believe I lost my mojo and I’ve lost it for some time, and I’ve just actually been tracking the last number of years as a zombie through my work, just going through it and so on, rather than really being living it. That’s not exactly the word that I was wanting, but the fact is that in my early part of my career, it was like living my role. I really enjoyed it. I did it without question. And the mojo was really high, but why did I lose my mojo the last couple years? I think it comes back to the vicious cycle of just self-esteem. Had actually been really badly hit. And so it was just going through every day saying, “Okay, I’m just going to do just enough to get through the role.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Because if you did just enough, then there really wouldn’t be much more room for somebody to tell you you’re not good enough. So that was your response to that situation. Understandably so. I get it. We all respond to situations differently, but I will never take away what your response was. The question for me is just doing good enough; what you need right now. And only you can answer that. I’m asking you that without judgment.
JAY: No, I was just thinking to myself. Yeah, just why I was going through that process of doing just enough. That’s a big question for me. It’s why I was doing that. And it does come down to self-esteem and so on, and other problems within the last couple of years. But at that point in time, when I was just doing enough, why did I not just say to myself, “Move on?”
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, you have to sit with that, right?
JAY: Yeah, absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: In terms of why you did that. It’s good to understand the why, but you should never let the why get in the way of you moving forward. Sometimes, what we bring to any given situation is how the situation’s going to meet us. So let me just explain that in your context. If that was happening in your case, and the situation that you were faced with was constant messages of, “You’re not good enough,” you can then show up as not good enough or just doing the bare minimum. There are times when we will reflect or react or meet the situation as a reflection of what it is giving to us. All right? If you’re acting in a reactionary mode, meaning you’re just reacting to what’s happening around you, the next step to not be reactive is to say, “Regardless of what’s happening around me, regardless of the messages I’m getting, regardless of a manager telling me that yet again, I didn’t do this report correctly,” it doesn’t necessarily change your sense of who you are. That to me is where confidence comes from, that regardless of the storm, regardless of what’s happening, regardless of the challenges, it does not affect the deepest core of your confidence, which is your self-worth. And so when I say that to you, how does that relate to you and your situation and the question you have around why was it okay for me to do the bare minimum? And why did I not just leave?
JAY: Good question. That was pretty deep, actually. That comment. You’re right. I did the bare minimum because the response that I was actually getting is exactly what you said, the fact is that it was a very negative response. So deep down in my heart, it was very much the situation I’m thinking I wasn’t worthy of anything worthy of myself. The fact is that when I looked at what I was doing, it was so overbearing and so on, but I just didn’t know how to get out of it. And so my situation was because I didn’t have that… Again, this comes down to belief. I didn’t have the technical education and so on. I didn’t believe that I was capable of going outside of where I was and getting another role. So for me, it was my family, my children… so for me, it was my family, my children, my wife, and ensuring that I was able to support them. So that’s why I stayed. And then so on. I would rather go through the pain than losing the position, and not being able to earn.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And look, I mean, what you’re saying there around why you stayed for your family and to be able to make a living, there’s no shame in that. That was your purpose for that moment in time. And so the fact that you found a purpose and anchor for that moment in time to get you through and the trade off was not moving on to a different role, is actually very empowering. You made a choice, you made a conscious choice to stay. I want you to hold that because as long as you can make a conscious choice of what you’re doing at every given moment, and there is a purpose associated with it, then you are standing up for yourself. That’s what we call agency, right? Your ability to see what’s in front of you and make a choice. Even if that choice is accompanied with some difficulty and some pain, it’s far different than you just staying and having no idea why you stayed. You just stay because it’s comfortable to stay. Because the difficulty and the pain is more comfortable than trying something new. You got to give yourself some credit around you being able to consciously make that decision. And the reason I’m highlighting this for you, Jay, is I’m holding the mirror up to you to recognize the very difficult things that you have been able to do. And when you can harness those things that starts creating that feeling of confidence, that belief of, “I can do hard things.”
JAY: Well interesting, because I didn’t look at it in that perspective, actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
JAY: You put it in the factor that I was able to deal with hard things. I actually looked at it in a different way, in a more negative way and said, “Well, why are you so weak?” When you look at it in two different ways, the results are totally different. So saying to myself, “Well, I wasn’t able to deal with this and fix it,” showed weakness. When you start to think at it from that perspective, that negativity starts to reflect on your life in general. But if you look at it from the perspective of how you actually put it, just a moment of go, well, you were able to climb parts of Mount Everest, and you were able to succeed, even though you’re constantly being slapped in the face. It was you were able to stand there and keep moving forward. So there’s the positive part of it rather than negative. So from the positive perspective you’d say, “Well, you have been successful.” And so that success then relates back to a positive mindset, and a positive body and physical self, because then you’re saying, “Okay, I’ve been able to overcome a lot of adversity.”
MURIEL WILKINS:
And you have articulated so beautifully the challenge that we all have. The reality is that our mind is so powerful, right? If you believe or have a certain perspective, it’s going to lead to a certain action that might then lead to a particular outcome. Again, outcome is never guaranteed, we try to increase the probability. And if you choose… It’s like the movie, The Matrix, right? Like where, I don’t know if you’ve seen it, where it was like, “Neo choose which one do you want to take? Because it will lead you in two different paths. Which door are you going to open?” If you are used to always opening the same door, you end up not seeing the other doors. And for whatever reason you are used to seeing things in a particular way. Well, as long as you keep seeing things in that particular way, and by the way, seeing things in that particular way helped you at some point or another, or you learned it at some point or another. And it helped you. It doesn’t mean it helped you in a healthy way, but it still helped you survive. But if you want something different in a sustainable way, not just to fake it till you make it, you have to start with, “How do I need to think about this differently?” I mean, you’re in IT, right? So it’s like… I’m assuming, I’m not big on technology, but let me try to flex my muscles here; if you’re trying to troubleshoot something in technology and you keep trying the same way over and over and over and over again, because you’re thinking about up the problem that you’re trying to troubleshoot the same way, it’s not going to lead you to any different results. What do you end up doing? You end up saying, “Okay, let’s just wipe the slate clean, erase the whiteboard, start from the beginning, take a step back. How do we need to be thinking about this problem?” One thing coming up here is the idea of perspective. Oftentimes in work or in life, we put labels on things, good or bad. While Jay has described his outlook at work as positive or negative, I encourage him to not think that way. Instead of black and white thinking, I suggest he take a step back and just think of things as a number of different perspectives he can hold without judgment. Only then can he make a choice on which perspective is going to best help him. So, I ask Jay what beliefs or perspectives would allow him to get back to the place where he felt most confident and embrace the process of learning and mastering skills?
JAY: Yeah, I think from my perspective is to not to look at everything as it’s too difficult, as you said, this negative, positive response. At the moment, it’s very, very negative. So rather than actually looking at it, as you mention, from a negative perspective, don’t actually have that perspective at all. Don’t have that view that it is negative, or it’s going to be too hard for me to be able to do it, but rather actually just go through the process. If I go and master this or learn this, or whatever happens, either negative or positive, it’s actually going to benefit me. Just don’t think about it as even negative/positive, but just think about what is the benefit? How does it actually help me move forward?
MURIEL WILKINS: Amazing what you just said, because when you just name it as a benefit, it neutralizes, “Well, is it a positive benefit to me and a negative to somebody else or vice versa?” It just is, right? Same with the process. The minute you start saying, “Oh, the process is hard,” or, “The process is easy,” or, “The process is this, the process is that,” that’s just the seasoning that you’re adding on the process, you know?
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But in reality, is it’s just a process. And regardless of whether it’s harder or whether it’s easy, what you have to decide is, “Do I want to engage in the process?” Regardless of whether it’s hard or easy, that’s the first step.
JAY: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then as you face it, you decide, “Oh, okay. So, hmm, yes, this part is challenging. So, I need to do X,” but you make those choices as you go. So, you’ve highlighted, you used the word mindset shift. And I think that that is really at the core of being able to feel confident is, are you aligning your mind, are you aligning your beliefs and your thoughts with a feeling of confidence? It’s very interesting because if you look at the word, “Confidence,” and you sort of look at the root of it, there is, I believe, well this is what I was told. So if that person told me the wrong thing don’t blame me. But at the root of it is, the origin confidelis, which fidelis in its Latin root means, do you know what it means?
JAY: No, I don’t actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: It means faith.
JAY: Okay, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if we think about confidence, it actually means operating with faith. And this is not religious in any way.
JAY:
Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? But when you then look at, well, what does faith mean? What does it mean to operate with faith? Operating with faith basically means faith is belief in the unknown.
JAY: Very true. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, to have confidence is actually the complete opposite of operating in a way where you have full knowledge and control of what’s going to happen. Confidence is your ability to put your step forward without necessarily knowing what’s going to happen. And so the opposite of operating in that way, the opposite of operating with, “Faith,” if you will, is operating with fear.
JAY: Yes, correct. And I think I’ve done that quite a bit, actually
MURIEL WILKINS: Operated with fear?
JAY: Yes. Yeah, operated with fear rather than confidence. There is a fear factor that my peers getting in a lot more recognition than what I was. So the fear came into that. Why am I not getting that? So rather than actually looking at the confidence and what I actually possessed and using the process, I was looking at something else, something that I, as you said, cannot control.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think part of your practice, Jay, is becoming more aware of what that track is, what that script is, what those beliefs are that you so very well have on repeat. And when they come up for you ask yourself, “Is this belief in this moment helping me get to where I want to go, or is it hindering me?”
JAY: Based upon that statement, I see a lot of situations just recently where I’ve actually thought it’s hindering me, absolutely. I’m thinking why certain things are actually happening, when I rather, I should say, as you said very clearly, I should look at the way that that particular person is executing something and learn from that experience rather than looking at it in a jealous, envious way. So rather than looking at it and saying, “Well, I’m not getting any recognition, I’m doing all this work and they are,” have a look at the system that they’re using and try to adopt that exact same system and then see how it actually plays out with me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So what you’re talking about here is just making a choice around how you want to think about [crosstalk 00:35:40]-
JAY: Exactly, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: … before you take action, right?
JAY: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Your power, which is what we gain when we become more confident, we gain power-
JAY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: … self-power. Your power is in your ability to make a choice. That’s where your power comes from. When we feel like we can’t make a choice, or because there is no choice, we feel powerless. You feel contained, you feel boxed in. And so that – [inaudible 00:36:01]. You feel contained. You feel boxed in. And so that’s why even the situation you were in where you were like, “I can stay and deal with this bully boss or I can leave,” … The fact that you made a choice … Still, I would suggest that you see the power in making that choice and not judge the choice you made.
JAY: Okay. Good point.
MURIEL WILKINS: You made the choice. And it’s similar to now as you decide, “What perspective is going to help or hinder me?” It’s not to say that one is better than the other. It’s just, “Which one is going to help or hinder me?” That’s it. No judgment.
JAY: Sorry, I’m just reflecting with your comments, actually, on various moments in my career where I’ve looked at the process and thought to myself, “Have I … What are my choices? What have I done?” And I’ve actually realized just a moment ago that were, actually, were choices that were quite positive but I potentially had seen them as a negative rather than … I understand what you’re saying is not to put a title on it but I look at it and say … that I’ve done things where I’ve said, “Well, okay. That was a choice that you made but you did it for a reason and don’t regret … ” Don’t look at it as a negative or regret that particular decision but look at it and say there was a choice that took a lot of guts to be able to say, “Okay, let’s go and do that,” and continue to go through whatever issues I’ve had in the past. I’ve realized that there were many times over the last 10 years or so that I could have quite easily have thought of as quite a negative situation. The choice was made. It didn’t hinder me in the sense that even though I didn’t get a promotion or whatever, I’ve still been somewhat successful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And when you know why you make the choice or you know why you’re doing what you’re doing, that’s what gives it a sense of purpose and meaning.
JAY: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? And a sense of purpose and meaning is what energizes you and that’s what having your mojo is.
JAY: Yes. Yeah. Understood.
MURIEL WILKINS: I just want to highlight for you, again, this notion of find meaning in everything you’re doing and be intentional and mindful about how you’re thinking about something so that then you can be intentional and purposeful and mindful around how you feel about it and the action you’re going to take. Okay. Let’s take all that and bring it back to where you are today. If you think about what your aspiration is in terms of potentially becoming a CIO, what do you think … Based on what we talked about, what do you think you will need to change or shift to or expand on in order to better align yourself or increase the probability that you can assume a CIO role one day?
JAY: If I was talking about a technical perspective … If I put it in particular buckets, okay? If I talked about the technical aspects of it, yeah there is a little bit more I need to learn. From a personal perspective, I don’t need to be so critical of myself. And rather than thinking that, what is it that you want to understand and learn and how do you actually change your personality accordingly?
MURIEL WILKINS: There it is. You just outlined, right? It’s the moving from, “I can’t do this,” or, “I’m not good enough,” to, “I need to learn and there’s still room to grow and there are areas in the way that I behave or some of the expertise that I have that I need to better align with the outcome that I’d like to have.” I don’t even like to use the word change because we’re not changing who you are; we’re expanding who you are. There are muscles that I have not yet built that I need to build. That’s the shift. And you give yourself permission to make that mindset shift when you take on exactly what you just said, which is, “Gosh, I’m very critical of myself.” Right? But guess what, Jay? That’s what your former manager was doing, it sounds like. He was being super critical so why are you now replacing him when he’s gone?
JAY: Exactly. Exactly. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
JAY: Exactly. I think it came down to the fact that it just became a habit. You’re expecting it so your mind’s saying, “Well, you’re expecting it.”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. And if you do want a break that habit, which it very much sounds like that’s what you want to do, that’s why you’re here today, the only way to break that habit is to then take on a different role towards yourself. You know who the critical Jay is. He’s there. And by the way, he’s not going to go away. You just need to know … You need to recognize when he’s showing up and tell him, “Shh. Shut up, critical Jay.”
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
JAY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I’m going to go with cheerleader Jay.
JAY: Okay. Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because cheerleader Jay says, “Brother, you still have … Yeah, you got stuff to learn. Yeah, there’s a tough road ahead but we’ve done this before. Let’s go.”
JAY: Yes. You’re 100% correct on that. Understanding that or returning back to that old process that was so faithful to me for such a long period of time, which actually created a massive amount of mojo … I would be so excited about what I was doing. Yeah, you’re right. Actually, going back to that older me or, potentially, much younger me and actually doing that … going through that process I can definitely agree that my mojo would come back.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And in doing that, what you’re reclaiming, Jay, is that part of yourself that you feel you lost …
JAY: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: … Under those different conditions.
JAY: Correct. Thank you very much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
JAY: I truly understand that now.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re welcome. I typically ask at the end what your takeaways are but I feel like you already went there. But I will ask, what’s the one thing that you feel you can do differently today as you face your work day as a result of this discussion?
JAY: I think the one thing that I definitely will do first thing is not being so critical of myself and everything else. And the word that I always use is that mindset shift, actually saying that looking at situations which you very articulately spoke about before is when I say things, I saw it as a negative. But actually seeing it and reflecting upon it and saying, “It’s not really a negative . It’s just a decision that you’ve made. Or it’s a decision you can make that has potentially a more powerful and positive response.” I think that’s the big thing here.
MURIEL WILKINS: A loss of confidence can be really hard to deal with. We’ve all been there. The question is how quickly we can find our mojo again. And, like Jay, it requires looking at what got you through those moments in the past and making a choice on what you need to think and do to move forward. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Thanks to my producer, Mary Due, music composer Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at
CoachingRealLeaders.com
and you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter,
@MurialMWilkins
or on Instagram at @CoachMurialWilkins. If you loved the show and learned from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 10: How to Handle Feeling Overworked
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Hi everyone. This is Muriel Wilkins, Executive Coach and host of
Coaching Real Leaders
, sharing a special episode with you today. It’s one of my favorites from season one, and I wanted to share it again this week because it looks at something so many of us might be feeling right now, burnout, whether it’s the ongoing impact of the global pandemic, working from home or in the office, increased workloads, or just a general stress that many of us experienced during this time of the year. A lot of people are feeling pretty overwhelmed right now. So listen in to my coaching conversation with one leader who is struggling with the intensity of her role in wondering long she can keep it up, because even if you haven’t been in her exact situation, you can probably relate. I hope you find it hopeful. HBR Presents. I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders.
Part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime Executive Coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call “Ellie.” She’s a leader who’s done well in previous technology roles, but always felt like she’s ready for more in terms of leadership responsibility. When she was offered the opportunity to lead at a startup, she stepped up and her ability to figure things out and get things done is exactly what’s valued in that fast paced environment.
ELLIE: So it’s a startup, which means we don’t have a lot of the basic foundation that most companies would have that are doing similar things. So there’s a lot of people wearing many hats, and there’s a lack of experienced leadership who can just come into the company and say, “I know how to build this practice.” Build it and then it’s done. So we have people who are having to kind of figure it out. And I’m one of those people that’s one of the figuring it out types.
MURIEL WILKINS: And while Ellie’s resourcefulness and work ethic is driving her success at the startup, it’s also causing her to feel burned out and to question her ability and desire to lead.
ELLIE: It is burnout out but it’s also just, I don’t think…. I either don’t think I’m capable of the job so maybe I don’t have those leadership skills or maybe I’m not quite ready for it that people thought I was. And now that I’m in it, I’m realizing I’m maybe not. I’m very flip floppy about it because I do actually think I’m quite good at it. So now I’m in this weird position of like, this is a lot of work. I don’t think I wanted that bad. And I end up just kind of frustrated with the circle of insanity that I’m constantly caught in to the point now where I’m just thinking, you know what, maybe this just isn’t for me. And maybe I should just go back to more technical work.
MURIEL WILKINS: Burnout will make you question your life choices. And that’s where ELLIE is at the moment. Does she want to be a leader? And if so, how does she lead without constantly feeling burned out? And because we all experience burnout differently, it’s important that I understood what it looks like for her. So that’s where we start the conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want to kind of get a better understanding of what burnout feels like to you.
ELLIE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Everybody has different thresholds and experience it differently. In your world like, if I were to sit in your seat, what does it feel like to feel either on the brink of, or actually in burnout mode?
ELLIE: I would say on the brink of is the constant exhaustion and just feeling like this isn’t worth it. I have a lot of conflicting priorities and I keep asking, okay, what can go? What can I drop? And it’s always been like a, oh yeah, let’s talk about that later type of mentality. And somebody recently gave me feedback to say, “Why don’t you just say no?” Don’t just say, “Yeah, I’ll do this but,” instead just say, “No, I cannot do this.” And then see if that changes the dialogue. So that’s something that I’m new, I’m going to try.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yep. How and how did that resonate with you when somebody gave you that suggestion to just say no?
ELLIE: I’m reluctant to say no, to be honest. Because I want to demonstrate my value. I’m afraid of losing a little bit of the traction that I’ve made, but at the same time, it’s also what I want, because I feel like it’s too much. So I have this internal conflict with myself right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think one of the questions that we need to get clear on is what it is that you want. Because I think this tension that you’re feeling is a bit of kind of going to the ice cream store and you’re only allowed three scoops and you’re like, “No, I want the vanilla and the chocolate and the butter pecan and the chocolate chip and the pistachio. And oh, by the way, I don’t want to gain any weight.”
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Story of my life. And that is ideal, but that’s also kind of magical thinking. What I want to talk to you about is shifting from magical thinking around the ideal of the way that we would love for things to be versus facing the reality of what they are, and then thinking strategically around how to move through it.
ELLIE: I think my greatest value is that I can make decisions. I can make judgment calls. I can give people direction if they’re lacking, or if they’re unclear, I am that strong voice in a meeting that says, “We’re here to do this and we’re not leaving until we accomplish this,” and I time box it to make sure it happens. I have vision, I have strategy and I can execute on it. I’m not all talk. I can also deliver on my vision. So that does seem to be where that natural leadership comes in is because a lot of people are maybe reluctant or don’t want that type of responsibility or accountability and I do. So I thought that, that was what I wanted. But if that means nonstop working all day every day, on weekends and feeling exhausted and feeling burned out and not being able to sleep, then to me that’s not what I want.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. It’s important to kind of get out of this cycle of burnout so that you can think through this.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: A little more clearly. Okay. Because when we make decisions in distress, in burnout, or as I’ve heard somebody once say, “Never make decisions when you are lonely, angry or hungry.” Right.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Never, never leads to anything good. And I think the same is from a burnout standpoint. I think we ought to kind of think through a couple of different levels. One is how do you deal with situations when you start feeling frustrated? I think the second piece is this, what does it mean to be a leader? Are your expectations aligned with what it means to be a leader? It requires being adaptable. That’s the part that makes it challenging, right? Is can you pull at different muscles, at different places in time? So on the one hand you said part of what you think is you bring to the table in terms of being valid is your strategic thinking and visionary, and being able to see things and then being able to get it done. And that is one dimension of leadership. There’s another dimension, which is the people side of it, right? In terms of your team and coaching them, et cetera. There’s also this component, which I think is pertinent for you, which is the ability to prioritize and focus. And the question behind that is, am I doing the right things at the right time, to get to where we need to go? And so when somebody told you just say, no. What they’re in essence telling you is you need to create some boundaries around what you’re doing and what’s most important at this time. However, if you are operating from a place of fear of not being able to demonstrate your value, there’s no way you’re going to place any boundaries. Because you’re constantly going to be in this, I need to show my value. I need to show my value. I need to show my value. Where does that come from?
ELLIE: I’m constantly in fear that if I don’t demonstrate my value, somebody else might come in and take this opportunity away from me. I think in a startup that competitive feeling has actually gotten worse than when I worked at big corporate environments. Change is slow in a big corporation, it’s quick in a startup. So that’s why I’m starting to internalize that of like, maybe this wasn’t the right course of action and is it too late for me to course correct. Should I consider another career? And now in my current role, I’m very conflicted. It’s like my CEO is supportive of down scaling my role, which I want because it’s too much, but at the same time, I don’t want it because I do like the leadership. I do like the responsibility and I do like the accountability. I just wish it didn’t require so many hours of my day. I have entrepreneurial parents. They both started their own business, they were their own bosses. I see this as being an opportunity to flex those entrepreneurial skills that I’ve learned from my parents. I do see myself being a C level in my career. Like as I get older, I see that being something that I want and something that I could do. But I think the path to get there is a lot harder than I thought it would be.
MURIEL WILKINS: So in your current situation, you do have leadership responsibilities, but they feel like a lot, right? It requires a lot more workload than you would like. There’s a question around, how much boundaries you’re placing. And if you were to say no to certain things, would you still be able to perform in your role?
ELLIE: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: You have a boss who says, “Hey, I’m willing to take things off your plate,” which would then bring your workload down.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: While keeping the title?
ELLIE: The discussions that we’ve had about ways to scale back my role would mean my role would change, which mean a new title.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. In your current role, you’re getting the feedback that no, you have the leadership capabilities that we need and they’re well valued. Am I correct?
ELLIE: Yeah, that’s fair. So the doubt comes from small off the side comments that I probably take too personally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative), like what?
ELLIE: So for example, I’m working on an internal project to develop some key processes that we’ve been lacking and it’s really going to help solve a lot of the problems that we’ve been having because our departments are just not talking to each other at the right times and setting the right expectations for what each other needs and said CEO has expressed concern slash annoyance that, that’s not going as quickly as it should. And I explicitly asked him about it and he was very careful to ensure that I understood that it wasn’t doubt in me and how I’m leading the project. It was just doubt that it was resulting in the outcomes that he was hoping for. But the damage was already done to my confidence a little bit. So I don’t know if anything, he could have said, would’ve made me feel better. I’d already beaten myself up about it basically.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, there’s a piece here around extending some empathy to yourself.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you were talking to one of your closest friends and that closest friend was sharing that particular example that they had experienced at work, what would you say to them?
ELLIE: Probably everything you would expect. I would say-
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t want you to tell me what you would expect. I really want you for five minutes, just humor me. Right? Make believe I’m that friend. What are you going to tell me? I messed up, I feel like I messed up. I’m supposed to do this project it’s highly valued for the company. And my boss basically said, he’s not happy with the way it’s going, but now he tried to make me feel okay about it and make it feel like it’s not about me, but I know he’s annoyed. And I feel terrible about it, I don’t know if this is for me anymore.
ELLIE: I am everyone’s biggest champion. So I would, and I might get emotional because I realize how stupid that sounds.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s okay, it’s not stupid. It’s real.
ELLIE: Yeah, I would say that get out of your head. I think you just need to pivot a little bit to understand what they’re asking for. It sounds like you’re all on the right track, but you’re just getting distracted, I think. And he’s giving you the opportunity to get back on track.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
ELLIE: So don’t take it so personally.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I can’t even say it to you any better, to be honest. I can’t.
ELLIE: I think a big part of the problem is that, in my personal life, that those seeds of doubt actually do come from my parents. Oh, this is going to be like a counseling session. So it doesn’t matter if the whole world tells me I’m good enough for that, I’m great at what I do. I always have that voice in the back of my head that says, “Yeah, but you didn’t do this that I wanted you to do.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes when I coach the conversation takes a turn where neither I, nor my client expected it to go. And in Ellie’s case this was that moment, where she realized that the seed to her self-doubt was not planted in this role, but rather a long time ago. As a coach, it’s important that I’d be aware of my client’s past experiences, but be very clear that it’s not a counseling or therapy session. My job is not to help them unpack and resolve their past. I approach my clients with compassion and empathy while helping them see what choices they have in front of them, so that they can be strategic on how to move forward to meet their goals. And so with that in mind, we move forward with the conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so here’s the thing. We all have background and context that we grew up with. Right? At some point we become adults.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: The beautiful thing about becoming an adult, you get to create your own voice, not your parents’ voice, not your teacher’s voice, not your friend’s voice. So the real, we can talk about what’s the right job for you and where do you want to go next and all these external things. And that might help you in the short term.
ELLIE: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: So they have its place it will give you some short-term relief, just like switching jobs will give you a short-term relief. Getting a pay raise will give you short-term relief.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But based on what you just shared, it’s not going to give you the sustainability of being able to play this leadership game for the long haul.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So what would it look like for you to be your own champion rather than relying on others to give you that voice of confidence?
ELLIE: That’s a great question. The role that I’m in right now isn’t necessarily the role I went to school for. So I am lacking all lot of experience in how to build this type of department for a startup.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
ELLIE: Cause I always worked at big corporations previously, so they were already built and they were imperfect at the time. So it was easier for me to pick a part the imperfections than to actually build it myself. So one of the things that I had said to my boss was, “If I’m going to do this, I need time. I need to do research. I need to learn.” And I opened the door for the possibility of maybe I’m not the right fit for that. Because in a startup you don’t have time, so I had said, “It might be in your best interest to find somebody who already knows what the formula for success is, and then parachute them in to do it.” And he didn’t want to do that. He said, “Nobody will be able to build it as good as you could because you understand, you have the relationships with the team, you do the work that’s necessary to do it right.” So when I see myself in back to back meetings all day, it just feels like I’m dealing with the tactical day to day stuff. And I’m not getting that mental capacity to actually strategize and do the planning and think.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, was there ever a conversation about the things you already have on your plate and how some of those things could be taken off to give your room to do this other thing?
ELLIE: Yeah. So I always, that’s where the feedback about me just saying no came in, was because I was again, I actively worked to take things off my plate and then something always gets added and it’s usually by him, which is the ironic part. So what I ended up deciding last night when I couldn’t sleep is I’m just going to start taking myself out of things. I’m going to decide where my time should be best spent. And I will, as usual, as long as I tell him, this is what I want to do, he’ll probably say okay, sounds good. So I’m not expecting a lot of resistance, but that was how my first attempt or my last attempt to have that conversation went.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so I think that it’s worth a try, right? It’s worth a try for you to put a stake in the ground rather than it. Because it’s clear he trusts you.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s clear that based on what you’ve said before, when you give direction, he responds.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sounds like it’s when you sort of give options of well, it could be this, it could be that and you know, he wants all the ice cream.
ELLIE: Yeah. You’re absolutely right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And so I think you need to start reining it in and say there are not 24 flavors, there are three flavors pick one or so. And that is creating focus on what’s essential and being a stake in the ground for yourself. And a suggestion that I would have for you is to not place the full responsibility of figuring out, what are the things that you can delegate just on yourself. So it’s actually a great opportunity to engage your team in that conversation to sit down and say, “Hey, so here’s everything that’s going on.” Here’s the highest and best use of my time. Here’s the highest and best use of your time. There are some things that we either need to say no to, and we’re going to purge, right. We’re going to do some spring cleaning and we’re just not going to do anymore.
MURIEL WILKINS: So purge some things and then reallocate others. And oftentimes the things that you can reallocate as a leader to some of your team members while they might be a burden for you, are developmental opportunities for your team members.
ELLIE: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So engage them in that discussion. From my standpoint, the way I see it is it’s not a question about, are you a good leader or not? I think you’re really at a place around, how do I scale my leadership up?
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. It’s like when you play sports, when you’re younger, the fields are smaller, the soccer field is smaller. The tennis court is smaller. The balls are softer, whatever it is you’re playing with. And then as you get older, the court becomes bigger. It’s the same field, same game, but it scales up. And it’s the same with where you are in your career progression, where you are right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t think is necessarily a question of, am I a good leader? I think it’s a question of, am I building the muscles to be able to scale up my leadership? And oh, by the way, this is your first time having to do it, so cut yourself some slack, you’re in learning mode. You are in a situation where it’s clear, you’re getting support from the top and you’re getting support from your team. And so it starts exercising that muscle of being able to ask for help, to being able to ask for support and it not being a sign of weakness.
ELLIE: I think you’ve just brought to my attention something that I never really thought about. So I just started to think to myself, like I don’t ever recall a manager asking for help or highlighting themselves as a risk. They do seem to all have this thought, if you will, of knowing everything and having all the answers and being the smartest person in the room. So I think that might be part of the reason why I never think about that. I think that I have to emulate how my previous managers have behaved if I’m going to be that successful too.
MURIEL WILKINS: A large piece of your frustration is you’ve been trying to things the same way that you always have and they don’t fit in this scenario.
ELLIE: Yeah, you’re absolutely right.
MURIEL WILKINS: For your current situation. I want you to focus on the things that are within your control. What are the steps that you can take around those different areas that will help in terms of alleviating some of the burnout and frustration that you’re feeling particularly around workload. So can you think of a time either recently or something that you have coming up that might be challenging where you’re going to focus more around or where it would’ve been held helpful to focus more on what’s within your control?
ELLIE: Some of the things that I’ve come to my manager about… Addressed my concern. I feel like I knew if I was just honest with him that he probably already knew or had suspicions about a lot of the issues or the concerns that I had, but he just didn’t have anybody telling him. And people are not in the habit of going to their leaders with problems or bad news. So sometimes those conversations can be really hard to have knowing that this was not something I was comfortable doing, but knowing it was something I had to do, because I knew that if I did air out the dirty laundry, that it would bring change much needed change. It’s like the option that I had been choosing to that point was feeling like there was nothing I could do to change the way things were and feeling like there was no point in making noise about it.
ELLIE: It would just make me seem like I was complaining or I was unhappy. And so that’s why I had a lot of stress about it because I was trying to tell myself, “No, this is, you need to do this. This is the right thing to do. He will listen. He will understand.” Yeah, sure enough at the end of the meeting, he was like, “Thank you.” He was like, “Thank you so much for telling me.” He’s like, “I knew everything that you told me, but I had no confirmation.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I think a big part of the work for you is recognizing when how you’re feeling, when you’re staying up at night, when you have that anxiety or whatnot, it’s like, what is coming at me that is changing or making me sway one way or the other versus what is within me? What is my voice saying? Let me hear myself. What are my options? The technical, the big leadership word of using this is, do you have agency? Meaning the wherewithal within to say, all right, what’s within my control. What actions can I take? Seeing all that and then making a decision.
ELLIE: I often think about this. I feel like the answers are there. I just don’t know. I just don’t have the experience. I feel like I missed a class in school or something about how to deal with these type of challenges. And I’ll have a new Rolodex of information that I can pull from.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
ELLIE: So that’s why, when you said just now, I’m like, is there a course I can take to do that?
MURIEL WILKINS: Like here’s the thing, right? I have good news and bad news. The good news is that at every stage in your career, in your life, there are different things to learn. The bad news is I don’t think its bad news, I actually, but you might hear it as bad news is I think anyone who is ever to claim that they have learned everything that there is to be a leader is falling short in some way or another, because leadership is a continue, it’s like life. It is a continuous journey of learning. Why?
MURIEL WILKINS: Because being a leader is the ability to deal with the complexity of what lies in front of us and ahead of us. Within all of the complexity that you’re dealing with, the complexity of humans, the complexity of technology, the complexity of the world, the complexity of pandemics and politics and da-da. So it requires an increased capacity to deal with complexity. Well, if that complexity is always changing, does not mean that we are also required to continue learning.
ELLIE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you can read as much as you want. And what I would suggest is that it doesn’t end. You become a student of leadership.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Rather than a achiever of leadership, two different things, two different ways of being a leader.
ELLIE: Hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And that, that’s where we kind of actually get to the essence of being a leader rather than just a title of being a leader. Like many high achievers, Ellie wants to sure fire recipe to lead. But what she doesn’t realize is that leadership is a nuanced, multidimensional pursuit. On the one hand, there’s the external dimension, the tactical, the technical skills we can learn. It’s what we often refer to as the outer game of leadership, how we do things. But the other side of leadership is the inner game. It’s what values we hold as leaders, what beliefs we bring about ourselves, about other people, how we think through things. That’s the inner game. And Ellie, like many of us has spent a lot of time on the external, trying to fix things by upping her skills, which is all good and very necessary, but now she’s hit a wall and she realizes that she needs to balance it out by also doing the internal work of how she leads and a big piece of this hinges on her ability to deal with her frustration and burnout more constructively than she has in the past. So we’ll pick back up at the point where we look at strategies she can use to face those moments. There’s something I want to introduce to you based on this notion of feeling stressed out and feeling frustrated, because as I said before, we all get stressed out and get frustrated and I think it’s important that (a) you accept that, but (b) have a framework on how to deal with that. Since it seems to be something that’s coming up for you quite a bit.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the first is to recognize kind of the cycle you’re in. So again, when thinking about what you’ve shared with me, I think about it in terms of kind of like this burnout cycle or frustration cycle. So you have an expectation around what needs to happen. The expectation either it gets met or doesn’t get met. If it gets met, then it makes you happy and you’re good, right. If it doesn’t get met, then it leads to frustration. If the frustration isn’t resolved in some way, it leads to burnout. That’s one cycle and it’s a vicious loop.
ELLIE: Hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: A different loop could be… Will you tell me, like what could a different loop look like?
ELLIE: Well, I guess based on what you described, when I sense that I’m getting frustrated, altering my outlook to be, this is a challenge, how do I learn from this? What is it about a situation that I’m in that is actually triggering the frustration? And is it something within my control that I can alter to reduce the impact of said frustration, perhaps. So recognizing that this is frustration would be first, because it, you have to kind of get ahead of it before it gets to the point of wanting to quit or retreat or whatever that looks like. Identifying what’s the cause of it or at least what’s the contributor to it. It might just be the straw that broke the camel’s back and not necessarily the problem just so much as the trigger.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you already are aware of because I asked you, what does it feel like when you start getting frustrated? So look out for those signals.
ELLIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think if I were to summarize what you said, I think there are a couple of steps you can take when you hit those situations. So step one is, identify what you’re struggling with. The second is exactly what you said, what’s in your control role versus what’s outside of your control, so that you can focus on what’s within your control. It doesn’t mean that the things outside of your control don’t exist, but you’re just going to put them to the side.
ELLIE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: In the midst of this struggle in the midst of what’s challenging yourself. This one is very important for you is what are you telling yourself?
ELLIE: Mm.
MURIEL WILKINS: About the situation and about yourself? And is what you’re telling yourself, serving you? What would you tell a good friend of yours right now? Same exercise we work through earlier, right? So that you can change or shift, not even change, shift that inner dialogue to one, that’s actually going to be help bring you in this process rather than working against you. So identify the situation. What are you telling yourself? What’s within your control? What’s out of your control? And once you figure that out, then you can go to, okay, so what choices do I have in front of me? Right?
ELLIE: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: What choices do I have? What can I say yes or no to? Where can I ask for help? What can I start, stop, continue? Ask yourself what choices do I have? And then you can make a decision around, out of all the choices I have in front of me, which one, which ones are most aligned with what I need and what the organization need or whatever the goal is. Why don’t we spend a little bit of time with you articulating what your key takeaways are from this conversation. So if you had two or three main takeaways that you’re walking away with, what would they be for you?
ELLIE: I think the exercise of focusing on what I control is going to be really important. And in the spirit of beating myself up all the time, it is something that I always give feedback to other people too, is why are you stressing about these things that are out of your control that’s such a waste of your energy. I need to listen to my own advice, which is… It’s so common sense and then that’s the second activity is I need to talk myself off the ledge that I constantly put myself on and I need to be my biggest fan, because like I said I don’t know why that is. Like I constantly uplift the people in my team and take them out of their own self-doubt and tell them how great they are and what their strengths are and what I see in them. And I try to encourage them and motivate them. And yet I don’t do it for myself. So I think that is a really good exercise that I’m going to take away like immediately is if I was my own friend, what would I tell myself? I think that’s a really good exercise because as soon as you said it, I was like dammit it, you got me. As I’m talking to you on the screen, on my other screen, I am looking at my calendar. I always have it open. And I am immediately excited to start clearing these back to back meetings, getting myself out of more activities, empowering my team. I loved your idea about coming to my team with all the things that I’m working on and just see if anybody volunteers for anything. I love that idea because not only do I know that they will, but I think that they’ll be excited to help me. So I think that everyone will be excited to not be met with me saying, “Oh, I don’t know. I’ll have to think about that,” instead I’ll be asking them, well, here’s everything that’s on my plate. What would you like to take? So I’m most excited after this meeting to start seeing if I can clear my calendar, that alone would be a huge one for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Well listen-
ELLIE: And keeping it clear, [crosstalk 00:35:06] and not letting it get replaced.
MURIEL WILKINS: Keeping it clear. And so that’s the part, right? That’s the part is making sure that there’s follow through and that you keep it sustainable. And if what it means is maybe it’s every month putting in your calendar that you have to do a calendar purging or every quarter. That will be a reminder that you have to do that. So I’m excited for you. So thank you. I really want to thank you for sharing and allowing me to be part of your process today.
ELLIE: Thank you so much. I think I really needed this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ellie left our coaching conversation with some actions to take that would help her deal with burnout. Prioritizing with her boss, delegating to her team and being clearer about the boundaries she needs to effectively do her job. She also left with a greater understanding that scaling up in leadership doesn’t always have to lead to burnout, but only if you have the skills to respond constructively, when you start feeling overwhelmed and take action on things that are within your control. And finally, Ellie gained a deeper and perhaps newfound appreciation that she is human something high achievers often forget. And that by having more empathy, understanding and compassion for herself, it will help her lead more effectively and sustainably going forward. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
SPEAKER 3: A colleague up here, he’s on the executive management team. He literally told me in a meeting that I wasn’t an executive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR, much gratitude to the leaders who joined me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners who share in their journeys, if you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show, apply@coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends. Subscribe, leave a review. From a HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 10: Finding My Leadership Voice
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest, who we’ll call “Daniella” to protect her confidentiality, manages a sizable team at a large company. She worked hard to climb the ladder from being an administrative assistant to a leadership position. And while she feels she’s a good people manager, she’s concerned that she falls short when it comes to interacting with other senior leaders, especially in meetings.
DANIELLA: It’s got to do with some confidence issues. I’m very aware these days of my communications shortfalls, like the way that I come across, especially in meetings. Sometimes I fail to influence others the way that I wish I could influence them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Daniella has overcome many obstacles to make it to her current role. Now she wants to make sure the way she comes across in these situations doesn’t hold her back from further career progression.
DANIELLA: It’s something that might be holding me back. The reason why I want to overcome that is because I want to continue to be taken seriously by my peers and superiors to a point where if an opportunity opens up for a higher level, I want to be considered a real contender for it. I guess there’s some things in my communication style that don’t accurately reflect the strong leader that I am on the inside, and so that’s what I’m trying to overcome.
MURIEL WILKINS: I start the conversation by learning more about her career journey so far.
DANIELLA: It was definitely a challenging journey. I never really felt like anything was given to me. I always felt like I had to fight for every promotion that I got. The reason why I ended up in the field that I’m in, is I was trying to become an analyst. When I was an administrative assistant, a mentor told me, “I don’t see a possibility for you to become an analyst in this department,” which was finance at the time, “but I hear there’s a lot of opportunity in distribution. Why don’t you explore that possibility?” So I took his advice, took me probably nine months of shadowing, networking, asking questions, and applying for the job for them to give me the opportunity. As I got better and better as an analyst, there’s a career path and I found that I really did enjoy developing people. It started from a training place where I felt like I’m training these people to be better. And then eventually it grew into, I’m giving these people feedback so that they can become an even better version of themselves. And when that was successful, it was immensely gratifying to me. And I have always had this desire to be a leader, to be in charge of something big, to lead a big team.
MURIEL WILKINS: And where did that desire come from? What has motivated you to do that?
DANIELLA: I honestly don’t know. I don’t know. It’s almost like a little bit of an underdog feeling. I started as an underdog when I was an administrative assistant and I found a function that I liked. And every now and then I guess maybe I would compare myself to people who are at higher levels than me. And I would ask, why not me?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, why not?
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m all for that. That’s an amazing story and I think one that probably not just motivates you but motivates a lot of others as well. When you have progressed through your career where you mentioned that one of your strengths was around learning from opportunities as well as you got a lot of joy out of managing people and helping them be better, what are some of the challenges that you have faced?
DANIELLA: I think 10, 15 years ago, I wasn’t as self-aware about challenges that I might have had at the time. I was always trying to prove myself. Prove myself, prove that I’m good enough, prove that I deserve to be here, that I’m worthy, in a way. All of those things were things I was actively doing, but wasn’t really understanding why I was doing those things. I’m sure I’ve always had this challenge, by the way. But I’ve become more aware of it in the recent years, is that the way that I come across in meetings can sometimes hold me back. It’s not a hundred percent of the time, it’s not all or nothing. Some meetings I do fairly well at, and some meetings I strike out. I’ve noticed that the meetings that I strike out in are the meetings where there’s a cross-functional group with other leaders or people of authority, either at my level or higher level, where I become intimidated. And I either can’t get my point across or I try to get my point across, but I stumble on it, I do it clumsily. And I’ve been given feedback already a few times that sometimes I don’t sound confident. I think this wasn’t a challenge in the past. When I was an individual contributor, I get feedback about, “Oh, you need to learn to command the room more.” Or “You need to be unapologetic.” My boss has given me coaching several times about, “You deserve this seat at the table. You are here for a reason. You don’t have to apologize. Sometimes you’re the person who knows the most in the room and you come across as if you knew the least, or as if you were doubting yourself.” I almost feel like I need to find my voice and I haven’t completely found my voice or mastered my voice. Does that make sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: It absolutely makes sense. It absolutely makes sense. So, success for you would be that your approach or your communication or your presence doesn’t hold you back from continuing on this leadership trajectory that you’ve been on for the past 20-something years. Just to make sure I have the story straight in terms of what you’ve shared. You’ve successfully come through in your career, faced some of the challenges that you have had in the past by becoming aware of them, addressing them, growing in them. And now the one that is more recent, it sounds like you’ve gotten some feedback on it, is in this area of how you come across in meetings. And specifically it’s in meetings where you’re dealing cross-functionally or with people who are more senior than you. And then the impact is, or at least what you’re hearing from others in terms of the way that they are perceiving you, is that you’re not coming across with confidence.
DANIELLA: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: In terms of your messaging. You know the work, you have the knowledge, but the way that it’s coming across, however that is, we haven’t boiled that down to just yet, is not coming across as confidence.
DANIELLA: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And you’re hearing things like, “You need to command the room!”
DANIELLA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Be unapologetic! You deserve a seat at the table!”
DANIELLA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: How does that resonate with you and what do you do with that?
DANIELLA: I’ve always been the kind of person that when somebody gives me feedback, I take it. I’m not a defensive feedback receiver at all. I’m like an open sponge of feedback. You give me all the feedback you want to give me and I’m going to take it all in. So I agree with some of the feedback. There’s a quote, I think I read somewhere, “Well done is better than well said.” I read this in one of those everyday quote calendars. I really do feel like that is my value. That has always been my value. But I think my boss and other people in the company and the culture of the company that I’m in have that value of, it’s more important for you to present yourself well, for you to have command of the room, for you to be a really well-articulate person. I guess my struggle with that is sometimes that can be style over substance.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a step back. This notion of style over substance is one many people struggle with. After all, shouldn’t your work just speak for itself? But so many like Daniella hear feedback like, “Be more confident.” While it’s well-intentioned, it isn’t particularly useful because it’s not actionable. Confidence is not an action. It’s a feeling that is created as a result of actions and behaviors. And so the real question is, what are the actions Daniella can take that will help her feel more confident about herself and help others feel more confident in her during these meetings? To uncover those actions I asked her, when has she felt confident? What did that look like?
DANIELLA: There’s been two good meetings in the recent past. One with internal folks from my company and one presenting to an external, like a client. Those both meetings were where I was presenting on something that I did. Work that I did myself. And I had to bring them on a journey with me, tell a story. What I think made me successful, aside from the fact that I knew the content very well because I was doing it myself, was there was a PowerPoint presentation and I was walking through the slides and I was taking my time. And then people would ask me the questions and I would answer them. And those two meetings went similarly and they went very well. And then I got a ton of positive feedback after, “Oh my gosh, you did so well. The client came out believing us, and you convinced this other group. This was great, what a breath of fresh air.” There are other meetings that I do on a almost daily basis with my team, and we’re talking about numbers and items and it’s very informal. There’s no PowerPoint or anything. Usually somebody’s sharing a screen, looking at recent numbers, talking about a promotion, talking about how did this item do. I’m very much in my element there because I’m talking to people we all speak the same Language. Yes, they are under me. They are subordinates. So perhaps the reason why I do okay in those meetings is because I’m not intimidated by them. I’m usually asking them questions, calling on them to speak, trying to develop their analytical thought process and things like… Those are working meetings.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. And when you walk away from those types of meetings, what is the adjective that you would use to describe the impression that you give to the people who were in those meetings?
DANIELLA: The way that I think I came across is smart but humble. I can talk about the content, I can go as deep as is needed to go. I think people come out of the meeting thinking, “Oh wow, she’s really smart.” But I also come across as humble because I’m usually friendly and maybe a little self-deprecating sometimes. I’ve been told that I giggle sometimes. And it’s true, but I don’t know how to stop it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen, a well-placed giggle is not always a bad thing.
DANIELLA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well-placed.
DANIELLA: I think some of my strengths in building relationships on a one-to-one or in a social setting, they help me become very likable, I think, in my team and my context.
MURIEL WILKINS: So now I want to hear the, as you put it, the strikeout meetings.
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
DANIELLA: Yeah. I’m having a hard time finding the right words, but I think I would describe myself as the little, maybe the whiny voice that comes in every now and then trying to get her point across. Trying to fight for her space in the call. Those calls typically are very unstructured and they move very fast, and there’s a lot of people talking, sometimes interrupting each other. I sometimes feel like I have to jump in to make a point or to make a recommendation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And you mentioned that in those meetings, they’re different than the ones that you described in the meetings that went well, in that the meetings that went well, you’re in control of the content it sounds like?
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the knowledge. Or there’s a sense of control because everyone has the same agenda.
DANIELLA: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Would I be right in saying that in these other meetings, there is not as much a sense of control from your perspective?
DANIELLA: I completely agree.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Part of what we’re starting to unpack a little bit here is rather than focusing on just how do I communicate, it’s how do I respond in situations where there are multiple variables that are out of my control. So it really is about your comfort with not having control. And therefore focusing on what is in your control, which is interesting because it goes back to this word of command. And probably where we’re going to get to is having command of yourself rather than command of others. How do you keep yourself in control even when everything around you doesn’t feel like it’s in control? There’s this sense of control around the content and the talking and the thing. And then what also feels different, I think you said in a previous comment, but correct me if I’m wrong, it’s just in terms of the cast of characters that are in the room. In the good meetings and the successful meetings, they’re either your direct reports, so there’s a sense of you are in control of them, so to speak, because there’s a level of authority. Or you’re the expert in terms of the knowledge. So it might not be a positional sense of authority, but there’s a content level of authority.
DANIELLA: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a sense of power that you have, again, going back to control.
In these other meetings, what is the power dynamic there? What’s your sense of power there?
DANIELLA: I’m one of the maybe five, six directors in the meeting, and then there is a few VPs and then a few a little bit lower-level, like manager folks, in the meeting too. It’s very much cross-functional. They’re not in my reporting line. Some of them don’t report to my boss. My boss is in the meeting too. The dynamics are, I’m one of the voices in the room, but there’s a lot of people in the room trying to talk at the same time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, got it. So you are one of the voices in the room, but you are not the voice in the room.
DANIELLA: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how does that make you feel?
DANIELLA: Gosh. I would be okay, typically, in a collaborative conversation with lots of people talking. I’ve been in those before and I think I was okay. I think the content of what we talk about in those meetings matters a little bit in this context because we’re usually trying to put out fires. “There’s a crisis here, how do we respond to that? Oh my goodness, this is happening.” It’s not a very chill type of meeting. It’s the opposite of that. And the purpose of it is to anticipate crises or try to prevent crises or respond to crises. So there’s a nervous energy. I think you’re right on about the whole command myself. Maybe that’s what affects me the most, is the fact that I’m nervous. I’m letting other people’s nervous energies impact me and I’m reacting to it. And then I feel intimidated to say something sometimes. Or, I will try because I don’t lack courage to try to say something. I’ll say it, but then it will come across ineffectively.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so let’s drill down into that because it sounds like you are speaking up.
DANIELLA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because sometimes what happens is folks go into those types of situations and they freeze. The meeting is over and they’re like, “Oh, shoot, I didn’t even say anything.”
DANIELLA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s like, “Dang it.” But it sounds in your case, you are speaking up.
DANIELLA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you are participating, but the way that you’re participating is, in your eyes, “ineffective.” So let’s unpack that a little bit. Characterize for me, when you do try to get your message across. I know you said you used the term whiny, which is more of an adjective. But what is it in the way that you get your message across?
DANIELLA: Yeah. And this won’t be for a hundred percent of the situations, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
DANIELLA: But the instances I’m thinking about, what I’ve done is I would start with a question and then explain my question and ramble to try to influence the bigger group that my point was right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So the outcome, if we just take that situation or those situations, it sounds like the outcome is to get alignment. In meetings where you’re dealing with your peers and those who are more senior than you, and the topic might be a bit contentious and there’s a lot of back and forth, in those meetings, regardless of the business outcome of getting alignment, how do you want to let those individuals, how do you want to leave them feeling at the end of the meeting? What do you want them? What’s the impression that you want to make on them?
DANIELLA: Okay, no filters. I want them to think I’m right. I want them to say, “She’s right.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And so in order for somebody to think you are right, think about you. When you walk away from somebody and you’re like, “Yep, they’re right,” what is it that that person does? And I want you to think actions here. What is it that they do that leads you to that impression that they are right? Which, by the way, is another way of saying they’re credible.
DANIELLA: I’m thinking through several different things. One is the way they come across is confident, calm. They seem to put their sentences together in a way that proves a point, and they usually support their point by some kind of fact. Even if they don’t have a presentation to give or a graph to show, they are usually presenting their point of view in a way that’s organized and calm and in control of what they’re saying.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you used the word confident and calm, which are adjectives. Again, those are feelings they give you. And we all want to be confident and calm, yet… How many of us are able to do that 365 days of the year?
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I’m going to push you a little further with this. You mentioned they put sentences together that have structure, that are organized and in control, and they support them with facts. What else is it that this person… And again, I want you to sort of envision a real person in your mind, what else is it that they do that gives the sense of credibility, confidence, calmness? In what they say, how they say it, even in their physical energy perhaps.
DANIELLA: The physical energy is usually more relaxed and laid back a little bit more. Not necessarily laid back, but just relaxed and not all wound up, basically. The way they say it is more measured. I know you’re pushing me and I know why you’re pushing me and I’m struggling with it. I’m struggling to think about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, that’s okay. We’ll unpack it. And I don’t know the answer, I’m just curious around what you’ve experienced. But I think you’re unpacking a lot. And what we’re trying to get to is not just stay in this place of the feeling that I want to get across, but what are the actions and behaviors that actually lead to that feeling? Because feelings don’t just come out of thin air. They are a result of the actions and behaviors that you have experienced from others. And as a result of that, you interpret those actions and behaviors as that feeling. That’s how you make meaning of it. And the same goes for you. So the work here is really about you deciding what is the feeling that I want to give to others. Which you’ve already said, “I want them to feel like I’m credible.” So the question now becomes, what are the actions that you’re taking in that meeting and to what extent do those actions increase the probability of giving others that feeling, as well as yourself? And so the way that I want us to think about it or you to think about it is… Because here’s the thing, the feedback you got around, “Be commanding. Be unapologetic. You deserve a seat at the table,” those are great motivational tweets.
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I don’t want to belittle them, but who doesn’t want to be all those things? It’s not like all of a sudden you woke up that day and said, “Today I’m going to decide not to command the room, and I’m choosing to be apologetic, and I’m choosing to feel like I don’t deserve a seat at the table.” They’re all good. They’re not really feedback because they’re not suggestions around what you can do. And that’s what we want to get to. The way that I want you to start thinking about or start exploring how you approach these meetings is I want you to think about how do you condition yourself, much like an athlete conditions themselves. How do you condition yourself to be able to put your best foot forward in that particular meeting? And we’ve already established that putting your best foot forward is not just about being collaborative and connecting. That’s important, but it’s also about being credible. And you don’t want to compromise one for the other. You want to do both. And so how do you condition yourself to do that? Which in your case, you’ve already got the collaboration connecting part down. It’s the credibility muscle. How do you build that? And so as an athlete, when you think about how an athlete conditions themselves, it’s specifically they condition themselves in three levels. There’s mental conditioning, which is what is the mindset that they bring into every competition, training, practice. They have their skill conditioning, which is what are the techniques that they need to be good at in order to perform in their sport of choice. And then they have physical conditioning, which is what is the physical energy that they need to have for their particular sport. If they don’t condition themselves in all three of those areas, they will not be peak performers. Okay?
DANIELLA: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I want to use that metaphor for you. And your sport are these cross-functional, messy, out of control meetings.
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I love it. Let’s start with mindset. What is the mindset that you have walking into those meetings? Meaning what are you thinking about yourself and what are you thinking about the people who are in the meeting? And what are you thinking about the situation, the context? And are those thoughts going to help you in terms of your goal to come off credible, calm, confident? Or are those thoughts going to work against you? Notice I’m not saying whether they are right or wrong thoughts or beliefs or assumptions. So, if you think back to one of these messy meetings, try to think back and reflect on what was your mindset going in.
DANIELLA: You’re a really good coach because I think you’re guessing my thoughts going into the meeting, even though I didn’t tell you yet. But basically I can tell you for the situation and context, I typically don’t come into those meetings with a very positive mindset. I will come into those meetings dreading it. Like, “Oh, here’s that crazy meeting again. What’s going to happen in this crisis meeting?” The people. It’s half-and-half, my opinions about some of the people in the meetings. Some of the people are great, amazing coworkers that I’m super lucky to work with. And then there’s a few people that maybe I don’t admire as much or don’t have as much respect for. So it’s mixed feelings about the people. And then myself, it’s almost like I’m not even thinking about myself at all. Because in this new world of Zoom back-to-back calls, I’m usually just walking out of another call straight into this crisis meeting. And my thoughts are probably still with the prior call or I’m quickly checking email. The multitasking can also derail me from being the better version of myself because I’m not fully there. I’m not fully paying attention.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let me play back the mindset. Which is often, if you think about the image of an iceberg, it’s what’s below the water, what we don’t see but is there and really helps dictate what the tip of the iceberg looks like. So in essence, your mindset can, if you don’t control it, very much dictate then the actions that you end up taking. And so let me play back what’s happening for you in terms of the way that you shared it. I don’t feel prepped and grounded walking into this meeting. I feel a little frazzled because I’m still thinking about the meeting I just had. I’m freaking dreading this conversation. Here we go again, this is not where I want to be. And oh, I kind of like some of the people here and I’m glad to be around them. But you know what? The others, I can do without them. Okay. So that’s my mindset. If I came to you with that and said, “This is my mindset walking into this meeting,” what do you think’s going to happen, Daniella? What do you think the feeling is that you’re going to get from me, just based on what I described to you?
DANIELLA: You’re not going to make a lot of sense in the meeting if you even say anything at all. A lot of people do just clam up and not engage. But if you do engage, you are going to sound like you’re maybe a little frazzled, maybe not paying as much attention, maybe not listening fully.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And oh, by the way, some of the people I already know give me negative feelings. So I’m going to take what they’re saying maybe a little bit more as an attack than maybe I should. I’m not sure. So if I flip the script and I say, “Okay, Daniella. I want to leave this meeting feeling confident, feeling calm, and feeling credible.” What is the mindset, Daniella, that you think would best help me, or again, increase the probability of having that type of impact?
DANIELLA: Putting in the frame that you gave me earlier, myself, people, and situation, context, I think it will be helpful next time if I prime my mindset going into the meeting. Try to feel positive about the meeting itself, maybe reframe what the meeting is for in my head so that I can have a better attitude about it. I can train myself to think more positively about all the people in the meeting, give them the benefit of the doubt, give them a chance in my head. And then try to center myself a little bit before the meeting maybe. Even if it only takes 20 seconds, try to actually take deep breaths and center myself. And not check emails, not multitask, but actually just say, “Okay, I’m present. I’m here. I’m going to pay full attention to this meeting and be present.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And by the way, I don’t think where we want to go to in terms of mindset is, “Just think positively and everything will be okay.” This is not positive thinking, and it’s not about denying the reality of it. When it comes to yourself, I certainly think there is this, “Am I prepared for this meeting?” That preparation is mental conditioning. So it goes back to this notion of what is in your control. And what is in your control is preparation. What do I want to say? What are the key messages that I want to get across? What do I want to think, going in? What are the outcomes that I want to drive to? That all should be happening before the meeting. And so, how much do you actually prepare for these types of…
DANIELLA: Typically, I have not prepared at all for these meetings. I think the reason why I didn’t feel I needed to was because I felt like me being a mere participant in the meeting with a bunch of other people wouldn’t really need me to prepare. But I know what you mean when you’re saying if I could work on mentally conditioning myself. I can see that that is necessary.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And look, it doesn’t have to be on the order of a big presentation that you’re making where you’re preparing slides and all that. But at the very least, there’s the preparation around what is the value that I bring to this meeting beyond being a mere participant. A big piece of confidence around mindset is making sure that you understand the value that you actually bring to that table. You have a good sense of your value in those other meetings. Again, it’s the knowledge you have, it’s the relationship you have with the people that you manage. You’re very clear around the value you bring. What’s the value that you bring in these other meetings where it’s cross-functional and with more senior people? How would you define that value? Why are you at the table? Why is Daniella there? Why is it not Monique or John or Jane or Tom? Why is Daniella sitting in that seat at that particular table at that point in time?
DANIELLA: I guess the literal answer is, where I sit in the organization. I report to my boss and she’s running the greater department, and I have a team that does some of the work. So the reason I’m there is to represent my team, represent that pillar under my boss.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, by pure virtue of your position. By position, anybody who’s in that role would be at that meeting is what you’re saying. Now I want to understand, why are you in that role? Because you mentioned earlier, one of the things that drives you a lot is you basically asking yourself, why not me? And so now you’re there and the question I’m asking you is, why you? Why are you there?
DANIELLA: Because I’m smart, because I deserve to be there. I’ve earned it and I’ve proven over and over again that I can get things done and add value to whatever I’m doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: The question then becomes, how do you add value in this particular situation? That’s the mindset. That’s a very different mindset than, I’m dreading this. I don’t know about these people in the room. I feel frazzled. That’s not to say those other things aren’t true, they’re just not helping you.
I think we’ve hit on two things. What are you telling yourself about yourself, and then the preparation around are you even prepared for this meeting. Which in your case, I think would be helpful.
DANIELLA: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I think this notion of the others, because you also mentioned how you feel about the others, and some are this way and some are that way. And you said, “Well, maybe I can think about them more positively.” Look, some people are just not going to be the greatest people to get along with. I think the question is how do you respond to it? And do you take that in? Versus just, it is what it is. Those are the people. How that person is doesn’t necessarily change how I feel about myself. A colleague of mine once said, “Be Teflon.” You know those pans, Teflons?
DANIELLA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You throw something on it, but it doesn’t stick. But you can still cook the egg. The egg doesn’t stick though, it’s a beautiful thing. Versus being the sponge that takes it all in.
DANIELLA: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mindset is the first step. And this all happens before you walk in the room. Daniella came to our coaching meeting looking for communication techniques to help her come across more confident. But she’s starting to understand that unless her mindset is aligned with the confidence she wants to exude, the techniques on their own are a futile effort. A big shift in Daniella’s mindset will better set her up for these interactions. That shift is for her to be crystal clear with herself about the value she brings to the discussions before she even walks in the room. With that in place, she can now move to focusing on what she says and the communication techniques that will best help her come across as confident. Mental conditioning is first. Now we can move on to the skill conditioning, which in your case is what do you say, what are the communication techniques that you can use that will help you come across as calm, confident, and credible. Again, going back to what the outcomes are that you have. You mentioned that when you were in the presence of others that came across in that way, what you found is that they were able to put sentences together in a way that makes sense. They support them with facts, they communicate in a way that’s organized and makes it feel like they’re in control of their topic. Is that right?
DANIELLA: Correct. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So when you communicate, again in these meetings, to what extent do you feel you do those three things?
DANIELLA: Hopefully not being too inaccurate about myself, but I don’t think I do that well in either of those things. I think I ramble. I might come across a little… Not exactly aware of how I am choosing to phrase, put my sentences together. And I probably don’t sound all that calm and collected, to be honest. This is something I’m learning and I’m trying to improve. My thoughts go all over the place. I’m trying to solve a problem. It’s not linear, it’s all over the place. I have not been giving myself the appropriate time to actually construct the sentence in my head before it comes out of my mouth.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. And look, nonlinear communication is a strength to have and a skill to have. Use it in the context where it’s going to have the impact of, I want to be brainstorming. I want to be creative. In this situation where you’re basically trying to advocate for something, which is, I’m trying to get my point across in the most clear, concise way possible to lead to a decision or a specific outcome. I’m trying to assert my point of view in a way that people can understand it. Then we want to be more structured and pithy. Versus, I think what you said you were doing is asking the question and then explaining the rationale leading to the conclusion. Rather than starting with the conclusion, giving the supporting facts and then opening it up, but always bringing it back.
DANIELLA: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I wish I could give you a magic bullet and just say, “If you say XYZ, you will come off as confident.” Or people say, “Just do this and you’ll demonstrate confidence.” Part of it is you have to build confidence in your message. You have to feel credible in your own message before you walk in the room. Well, how the heck can you do that if you haven’t even thought it through? Doesn’t need to take a ton of time. But at the very least, think about what are the three things I want to get across in this meeting? What’s the framing that I would use to tee it up? And at the very least, it leaves you prepared for some of the things that you are in control of during the meeting. Which is you, nobody else. Now let’s talk about the last piece, which is your physical conditioning. And this is the physical energy that you exude. The physical energy that you exude in these meetings, as well as potentially the physical energy that you take in. You talked about if other people are nervous, then that nervous energy, how do I take it in? How does that impact me in the way that I physically show up? For you, when you’re in those meetings where you’re not feeling as confident, how do you think you physically show up in terms of physical demeanor? Or even your voice, because that’s part of your physical energy.
DANIELLA: I think in this new Zoom world, most of the time it’s not really on video anyway, so I might not have to worry as much about what I look like or my posture. Those were things I used to worry about when we were all in the office together. Do I have a relaxed posture, am I taking the appropriate amount of space and things like that. Now it’s all about my voice. Like now I’m talking to you, my voice is relaxed. I’m feeling okay. But I think my voice tends to get higher when I’m a little nervous or when I’m worked up. My voice is already high. So for it to get higher, it’s just going to make it more a thinner sounding voice. And I’ve become a little bit self-conscious lately also about my voice. I hear myself on videos sometimes and I go, “Oh, geez.”
MURIEL WILKINS: You know, your voice is your voice. We can’t change genetically. We could, but we’re not going to do that. And so there’s two things here. One of them is that you said, “Because I’m on Zoom, I don’t really need to pay attention the other things.” That’s a myth. Your body is all connected. And so it’s a fallacy to think that just because people can’t see you, that they can’t feel you. My recommendation is, even when you have video muted or you’re on a conference call and on speakerphone, you should act as though you’re in person and they can see you. And so what you want to again ask yourself is there alignment? Notice, I will never say you need to do XYZ with your posture, with your eye contact, etc. All I’m going to ask you is, is your body, what you’re doing with your eyes, what you’re doing with your posture, what you’re doing with your gestures, what you’re doing with your voice…. And by voice I mean the pace of your voice, especially the cadence of your voice. Those are things you can control. Inflection of your voice. Are those things, again, aligned with this impact that you want to have of being confident and calm. So a big piece of this, and I think we can start landing the plane, is you’re very aware of the situations that make you feel a certain way or where you’re not getting your best version of yourself across. That’s step number one. Now you know have to do something differently in those situations. If you just keep going into those situations the same way you have before, you’re going to get the exact same results, I guarantee it. What do you do? You look at those three domains. And much of that work happens before you actually step into the meeting. What are some of your key takeaways?
DANIELLA: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what will you be not only taking away, but in terms of learning?
I’d love to hear key takeaways in terms of learnings, but also actions and commitments for yourself, specifically as you go into some of these meetings that you have with your peers and other leaders in the organization.
DANIELLA: Yeah, I did get a lot of takeaways. And I am going to be putting a lot of the practical stuff that you advised me to do into practice. Some of the mental mind shift pieces that you gave me today are that just because I might not have as much ownership of something, doesn’t mean I’m inferior. That was a really good one. When you had me explain why I’m in the room, why I’m in that position, and you had me align with what I told you about being smart and deserving to be there. And my proven track record, and you are like, “That’s why you are in the room.” I think that that really, really helped me. The analogy of being Teflon instead of a sponge really helped with my mindset too, because I think I’ve been a sponge this whole time. And then of course, the whole concept of mental, technical skills, and physical conditioning are all aligned with how I want people to feel about me at the end of the meeting [inaudible 00:48:01]
MURIEL WILKINS: And how you want to feel about yourself, which is probably-
DANIELLA: Yes. How I want to feel about myself, which we’ve been repeating it through this session, is calm, confident, and credible. The three Cs, I think these are the big ones. I think they’re going to really help me be more successful in this kind of thing in the future, for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, great. I love it. The three Cs of Daniella.
DANIELLA: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: So go and try it. You have nothing to lose, right?
DANIELLA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Go and try it, and if you have to recalibrate a little bit, you recalibrate. But just know that even when things are seemingly out of control, which they are, there are always things outside of us that are out of control, the one thing that’s in your control is you. And that’s really the only thing.
Mastering that, conditioning that, training that. Mental, skills, physical, is what’s going to allow you to then approach situations in a way that actually support you versus get in the way of your leadership.
DANIELLA: Okay. Thank you so much. You’re the best.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you.
DANIELLA: Really appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Ultimately, every leader needs to find their voice, a voice that is credible and connects with others while still remaining authentic and signature to who they are. Like in Daniella’s case, the place to start is by defining the impact you want to have as a leader, no matter what situation you’re in. And then making sure that how you think, how you communicate, and the physical energy you exude, all line up with that impact. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and for season one of the show. We’re taking a little break, and we’ll be back later this year. In the meantime, if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you. You can apply to be a guest on the show at coachingrealleaders.com, or we can stay in touch on Twitter @MurielMWilkins, or on LinkedIn. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, assistant producer, Liz Sanchez, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who joined me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys in this first season. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 11: Why Do I Keep Getting Passed Over for the C-Suite?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one time coaching meeting focusing on specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone who we’ll call Randy to protect his confidentiality. He’s achieved a lot in his career and is now at the executive VP level at his company. His aspiration is to make it to the C-suite and he’s been working hard to do so.
RANDY: I’ve tried for many C-level positions. It seems that I always get through to the finals, but I never get the final decision to take on the brass ring or take on that job. And I was just wanting to understand, maybe there are things that I’m doing or saying, or don’t know that led to that. I’ve had just a couple recently that really I thought were just fantastic. They loved my background, loved the interviews, had several interviews over several months and then no opportunity. “Sorry, we’re going to go another way. We think your background’s outstanding. We think you did an outstanding job with your interviews. However, we don’t feel that you will be happy with us.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Randy has faced this situation several times, where he gets close to getting the C-suite role, but then doesn’t. As some who has had a longstanding, successful corporate career, he finds himself questioning what exactly is going wrong. I should also mention that Randy is black, which adds a nuanced layer to his experience.
RANDY: You start to scratch your head and say, “What am I doing wrong? Is it something that I’m doing? Is it something that I need to look at and do a hard look in the mirror and say, ‘Maybe there’s something I can do better.’ I’m all about being better. And I think I can do that. It’s not that I deserve it, I want to prove that I can do it. And I believe I can.
MURIEL WILKINS: Randy is wondering, why not me? When it comes to these CEO roles that he’s running for, will he ever get to the goal? I start by asking him about the secret sauce that he thinks has made him successful so far.
RANDY: I would say the secret sauce is very strong in my knowledge of the industries that I’m in, but more importantly, personality. I would say the experience I’ve had with good listening and developmental skills of my team members has been very successful for myself. I’ve been labeled as a guy that can take what many people in the industries will throw away as employees that have bad reputations in terms of work performance. And based on my skill set, turn them around and they are very successful and they become A players. And I’m very proud of that. And then in the many industries that I’ve been in over the years, I’ve been able to attract many people in my network to continue to work with me, which is also plus.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so, I mean, that’s great that you’re able to turn around poor performers to A players. Not a lot of people are able to do that. And what drives you? Like, what gets you going every day in terms of your role?
RANDY: I am goal-oriented. So the goal and the objective of achieving something that is impossible always has been something that has motivated me to achieve and achieve great things. So in all the aspects of the areas I’ve been in, it’s always been in areas where I’m underrated or underestimated. And that to me is a motivator where I always have come out on top and delivered more are than expected.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So I’d love to understand what challenges you’re facing right now and why we’re having this conversation. What brings you here today?
RANDY: I tell you, I am trying to get to that next level of C-level in the executive ranks. And it’s been like a glass ceiling for me. I have not been able to achieve that even though I’ve had tremendous success. And I am challenged to know if it’s relative to my age or my race or something there other, because I’ve had roadblocks in both of those where I’ve achieved, I’ve hit all my numbers, I’ve delivered in every aspect that was expected. And, like we just talked about develop the resources, but never the prize. So it’s been a challenge for a number of years.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). And is that challenge internal to the organization that you’re in now? Or have you explored external opportunities as well?
RANDY: It’s happened internal, but it’s been more external when I’ve been exploring other external opportunities as well. I’m also exploring opportunities outside of corporate America where maybe it’s time to take the tremendous skill set that I have and do something on my own and explore that. So these pitfalls and roadblocks that I’ve highlighted, I make them lemonade basically, I take them and turn them around and produce something that is my own.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I always like to think about what the alternative scenario is, right? So, particularly for those of us who are fixated on the goal, myself included, sometimes it’s helpful to think about, well what happens if the goal doesn’t come to be? Right? And so if you didn’t get the C-suite and this is not to sound pessimistic, again, just curious. If you didn’t get that C-suite position, what would happen?
RANDY: I would probably definitely take another road. I’m at a point in my life where based on young adults in my household with my children, they have opened my eyes to a lot of things that as my age, where I was very quiet upon in terms of my personal thoughts or personal feelings, the generation today is pretty vocal on those things that make them interesting, make them successful, their concerns. And then in my generation, those are things that was never communicated. I don’t think many people even cared, it was more of a suck it up and figure it out and go make it happen. And in many cases I did that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay, got it. So our children often teach us the greatest lessons. Like, what is it that you’re seeing in them in terms of what they’re able to communicate that you felt you did not voice as you went through your own career journey?
RANDY: I would tell you their confidence of being vulnerable, their confidence of their ability to voice their opinion and not look at it as a weakness, but a strength to overcome and become stronger with a community, with others helping along the way. When I grew up, and even in this current state, I’m less inclined because of trust issues. Because I would see those things being used against me more than helping me. And in the environment… Oh, if you’re talking about you’re having a challenge in achieving a goal in an evaluation period, it could be thrown back at you that that challenge was highlighted as a weakness and they use it against you.
RANDY: I’ve seen it happen many times in evaluations of others, or the fact that you don’t feel you have the strength or the capability to complete a goal, but you need help. That can be thrown in your face as well. Even though I think all of us at some point need help to move forward, need help to achieve something, need help to become who you want to be. No one’s [inaudible 00:08:34]. But I think in the world that I’ve been in as a black man, a lot of those things were never offered to me more as they were to my contemporaries. They were offered only as, lack for better word, never stated, but just led to that lack of trust where I would want to keep that to myself, work through that and not seek the help.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I’m getting the sense, Randy, and correct me if I’m wrong, that you really are sort of a pull it up by the bootstraps, as we say, type of guy in terms of how you manage your career.
RANDY: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What I’m also hearing is that the support or hope was not offered, and as a result of it not being offered, you did not feel in a position like you could ask.
RANDY: That’s correct. And I’ve had examples where others, in my purview, had and I saw the consequences.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). All right. And those others, were they folks who also were black males or black women? Or were they just in general, peers?
RANDY: Peers of color.
MURIEL WILKINS: Peers of color. Okay. So very specific-
RANDY: Men and women.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Very specific in terms of the experience that you have. And I think that’s important to flush out because that’s the context that we’re operating from, right? It is really about what is your experience as a black man through the corporate ladder versus just generally as an executive, right? That there are certain things you’ve experienced that others might not have. And how do you deal with that?
RANDY: Yeah. I will tell you one thing that challenges our own social biases, and it’s become even more prevalent today working with certain peers and certain companies that they already come into the workplace with, and that has been a noticeable challenge. I’ve always guarded, protected my workforce and abdicate for them in those social biases, but at the same time, I see them in play many times for whatever reason. And I’m a big abdicate to break those.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Got it. So I’d like to fast forward to current where we are today, right? And going back to the original question you had, which is I’m ready for the next level, which is at the C-suite, I’m putting myself forward for those roles, but I’m not getting them. And the question is why. Is it because of your race or age or because of experience or some other factors? Who knows what they are. So I’m wondering, could you share with me some of the experiences you’ve had in terms of getting to that place where you’re putting yourself forward in an opportunity and getting the role, like what happened?
RANDY: Yeah, sure. I’d be glad to. I had an experience outside of my current role right now, senior leader position, went through all of the layers of interviews with all of the executive leadership and then had interviews with board members, because the role would report up through not only the CEO, but also to some of the relative board members. Had those interviews all with flying colors, plus, plus, plus. A, We’d like to have this guy. Come to my last interview, had a video conference. I would tell you at sometimes, and you may get a chuckle, people when they see you, they jump or they recognize, because when we all talk to others without video, we have an impression of what they may look like and sound like. And I don’t think she recognized me for who I was. I think that startled her because it was very noticeable to me. And then she-
MURIEL WILKINS: As a black man?
RANDY: As a black man. Right? And I don’t think that came up in any of the conversations with the other executives, of course. And we proceeded to not really talk about the job, but all the things about, social things relative to being on site, making sure that I understood that the requirements were X and Y, are you sure that you can fulfill these obligations? And I’m like, I’m wondering to myself, obviously you’ve had these conversations. We’ve been going with these interviews over three and a half months. None of this should be new to you.
RANDY: We ended the conversation where I did answer all her questions. And then my next comment back in about a week was, “You’re outstanding. We love your background, but we think you’ll be disruptive to our environment because of all the things that you’ll want to change because of your tremendous skill set. And we’re just not ready for that. And for that reason, we’re going to have to say, you’re not a good fit, but we wish you the best. And if something comes up where we’re ready for that, we’ll give you a call.” That was the gist of that conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so how did that land with you?
RANDY: Well, I wanted to call immediately and find out more, challenging myself to ask so I could get better, understand why they made that choice, and why do they feel that my ability to be a change agent is disruptive, would be disruptive. I never gave any indication I would be disruptive, I never gave an indication that the skill sets that I do and work with every day lead that way. I’m more of a collaborator. I’m more of a team builder. I’m more of making sure the organization social norms and goals are met. I do think out of the box, but I would tell you what, I’m quite considerate in wanting to make sure that I achieve the things within the right parameters of the company. And everything I’d done led to that and blew away the people in that regard. And they made comment to that. So I was just shocked.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative) Okay. And so did you ask? Did you call and follow up and say, “Hey, I have a couple questions.”
RANDY: I still did.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I’m like fascinated now, right? Like, and so what happened?
RANDY: Well, you know what? I called, and it’s just the funniest thing and the most frustrating thing, I called the CEO and he said, “I can’t give you an answer other than it’s just not right for us.” And I said, “Well, can you expound on what’s right for you? So I can become a better individual in understanding how I could tell my interviews for the future. What was wrong in what I did?” No answer. So it was really no big answer, right? And that’s been the case in about three, I’ve had three like this, where I am a finalist or I am the finalist and they either go a different way or they say you’re not a good fit.
MURIEL WILKINS: So there’s sort of a pattern or you’re thinking it might be a pattern in terms of what your experience is. So that’s a very logical, up in our head way of thinking about it. And so I want to drop it down a little bit and ask you, what is your gut telling you?
RANDY: Good question. In that respect, my gut was telling me it was definitely social. It wasn’t professional. My gut also told me that there is an internal bias that is there. So maybe it’s smart for me not to be there, because I would be a disruptor, and I would challenge the status quo in that regard because that’s not who we are and not who I am, okay? My gut also told me that, why would I want to work for a company that is not honest, but propagating something that is not fair and truthful? But I didn’t go down that road. I’m too strong for that. But I am very educated and open to logical and constructive criticism. I always have been. But in this case it was very generic and really nothing to say that I had an issue, or if, let’s put it this way, they were not willing to share. So, and in my case, I’m saying, how can I be critical of myself when I didn’t get anything to understand, but I reflect on it? So I think the things I thought that I just shared with you, but internal I’m saying, “Okay, I’m not going to change how I am. I’m not going to change what I look like, but at the same time, maybe I need to look at areas that are more open and receptive to me.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay.
RANDY: As I am.
MURIEL WILKINS: As you are. Exactly. As you are. As you stated, you’re extremely goal-oriented, right?
RANDY: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I could imagine that when there’s no explanation as to why you can’t reach the goal, it can make you feel a particular way.
RANDY: Well, you want to look inward. And first of all, always look at those things that are, what you believe. We all have them in our own back mind or our minds as shortcomings, right? Why not? Why wasn’t I successful? If you can pin it on something, it’ll just leave you hanging. I really dislike that a lot, because to say you’re not a good fit for us, there are legitimate reasons they don’t want to say. You know that, we all know that. Many times I’ve had interviews with candidates, I’m very clear on the reasons why we can’t select them or couldn’t select them. Or, “Here are the things that we would recommend that you build your resume on. Here are the things that you should go back and get some training in.” To give some tangible evidence of why is very helpful. When you don’t have that, you start to internalize and look inward, I think. And then in my case, I did. But at the same time, I got to keep moving forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: RANDY is someone who seems to be open to change, to learning more. He’s very goal-oriented. And so it can be very frustrating to get so close to the C-suite that he can touch it, only to be told no with little information. As someone who’s used to constantly working on himself to prove he can meet expectations, this situation leaves RANDY in a conundrum and digging for the why. Is it me that’s the issue? Or is it them? And while trying to understand the why, it’s hopeful in many cases, at times, it can lead to constant back and forth internal debate that leads nowhere. So to help RANDY move forward, I ask him to consider what he could do, even if he doesn’t know the exact answer to his question of why he’s not getting the role. So it’s interesting to me that you said in absence of the why, you internalize it. And so I’d like to think about what your other options are in absence of the why, in terms of how you respond to situations when the why is not clear.
RANDY: I did internalize it. The why is to go beyond myself and start reading more. I start looking at skill set analysis more. I start looking at my personality and my level of communication. I start doing analysis on, I don’t think my skill sets of challenge, but maybe how I communicate, how I answer questions, how I refrain to responses, maybe of some question. Don’t know. But I looked at all those things, I personally said no to all of those things, they weren’t a problem, and then you start evaluating other things, such as the things I talked about, social biases or things like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. I mean, look, here’s the thing, right? There will be situations where there is no clear why. And I think that part of it for you is, as you’re doing right now, seeing that there’s many paths to responding to when there’s no why. It doesn’t always have to be about, there’s a shortcoming in me. Yes, that could be a starting point, and you’ve got to also look at it in the context of everything else, which is the external piece, right? So I think that’s really important because even as you move forward, regardless of what you do, when there is ambiguity as to why something is happening, you can try to get it as much as you can, but you might hit a wall where your endeavor to figure out the why is actually not helpful. And the frustration that you feel is, I just want to pinpoint exactly what directed at. You’re frustrated about filling the blank.
RANDY: When you try out for a role and you have several interviews and you have several candidates that fall to the wayside` and you’re still the last one, all of these things were done. And then you get to this end state that happened. But I’ve had others the same way. So I’m just questioning that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So the frustration is about doing everything that you possibly, in your mind, you possibly can do.
RANDY: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then getting to a place where it feels like the decision is based on something that’s out of your control.
RANDY: Absolutely. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so Randy, like over the span of your lifetime, how have you dealt with, and it doesn’t have to be professional. Like, I’m just curious like, how have you dealt with situations where you are not in control?
RANDY: Well, it goes without saying in my background, I’m a religious person. So we pray, of course, I’m very prayerful. But at the same time I, like I said, I look for other opportunities and I keep pushing. So those are things that keep me going. Plus I have a very successful family where we do a lot of things for others. That also is something that’s outside of this world. And let’s be clear, I don’t have a bad role right now as an EVP. I just want more.
MURIEL WILKINS: You want more. And look, there’s nothing wrong with that, right?
RANDY: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: As long as it’s for the right reason.
RANDY: Absolutely. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you can only know what that reason is, okay? No judgment on my end as to why somebody wants to get to that next level. What’s interesting to me is that you, well, let me back up a little bit. Like, I don’t have a crystal ball to be able to say whether here nor there, why you didn’t get those roles, right? Like, I’m not talking to those people, so I don’t know. But I also know that yeah, does bias exist? Absolutely it exists, right? Now whether that’s the reason or not, I don’t know. I’m not in a position to say, “Hey, here were the skills or the communication factors or all the things that you could possibly work on.” So I’d be a fool to sit here and say, “Oh, well, here are the attributes that I think you’re missing.” What I can do is we can work through how you approach that situation and how you’re thinking about the pattern that you’ve identified in terms of not getting the roles that you put yourself forward with. And then based on that, determine for you, what do you want to do with it? Right? One of the things that’s striking to me is that it sounds like, even up until recently with the interviews that you had, but throughout your career, you have looked for, what do I need to do in order for me, me meaning Randy, to work out for you? You being the organization, the people. So in a way, you’ve adapted yourself to fit whatever the need was, whether it be organizationally, personally, whatever it might be, right? And that has really been your kind of a trademark of being able to succeed and move up the ladder. And I guess my question is, at what point do you start asking what works for me versus what works for you?
RANDY: That’s good. Can you help me a little bit more in terms of when you say me versus you? I kind of blend them together.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What works for Randy? What works for Randy? Yeah. I mean, so there you go. You said you blend them together, right?
RANDY: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: So before we even dig into that, the fact that you’re blending them together in terms of what works for the other, versus what works for Randy means that you are making your success contingent on the other, rather than grounded in what it is that works for Randy, what works for you. And I’m not saying you have to ignore environment and ignore context. Clearly, you have to do that. Like, you go work for a company, you figure out what’s going to work and you try to make it work. The question is at what cost.
RANDY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the cost usually is a cost of self. And so what I’m asking you is you have spent so much of your career figuring out what you need to do to be successful in these other realms, right? By other people’s definitions, what does it mean to be successful for you and what environment works for you? So I’m flipping the question.
RANDY: I know, and I like it. You’re right. I’ve always blended the two to be more of a chameleon instead of adjusting to what I know is right. Now, I’m an abdicate for what is right for me, but more in the context of navigating in the company in which I’m in, versus what’s true to me as a person. And that’s very telling because, and again, age context, I never looked at it that way until kind of the fog has been lifted and I can see a little clearer now. So to your point, yeah. What’s good for me may not be any of these companies, more and more I think about it. And as you and I have talked here, maybe the better thing for me is, is to move on to something where I can be that change agent myself, I can drive the right expectations that I feel are pertinent for me, make sure others that I see are under represented or don’t have that voice have it, and be all those things that are important for me to others, but also keeping myself focused on those things that are important.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Yeah. I mean, look-
RANDY: For me. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So you reach a point where as talented as a chameleon one can be, there’s some things you can’t chameleonize away. I don’t even think that’s a word, but I’m going to make believe it is, right? Like, you can’t. And so it is what it is. And I think a part of this process is you seeing things clearly for what they are and operating from that place, rather than from a place of what it should be, right?
RANDY: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: The frustration comes from what it should be. The frustration comes from that. It comes from-
RANDY: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? It comes from, I should get candid feedback. We should get candid feedback on why we’re not getting the role. There should not be ageism or racism or any types of bias in the hiring process. I should be able to get to that next level based on my track record and that experience, right? And listen, I’m all for, if all those things deem themselves to be true in my lifetime and your lifetime, I will be a happy camper. And we have to see things for what they are today in your situation, and then make choices for you based on the reality of what’s happening. And the reality is you’re not getting those roles. So when we start thinking about it more in the context of, what works for Randy? Specifically, what type of environment or company. I know part of it is you might go on your own, but let’s say it was to go into a company where you’re actually interviewing, what type of company would you be looking for?
RANDY: Well, it’s interesting you brought that up. I’m starting to look at companies that have a social platform, companies that have a vast… The board of directors and the staff is a diverse staff, diverse board, which gives me some indication that they have some of these things that we’re talking about. They are working through and working on, not saying that that’s the case, but at least that’s an indication that they have some openness to a number of different personalities, as well as people.
RANDY: And then I’m looking for companies that have growth and history of growth in the areas that we’ve talked about, that allow that transparency and have no fear factor in that. And then I’ve also reached out to leaders in certain companies, I’ve had deep conversations on to get some better feel for if this is the area I want to work in and I’ve started to apply for some of those areas. Whereas before, I would tell you, I was not as selective. I was selective once the knock came on my door versus me knocking on the door myself. That’s one of the things I’ve turned around as well. So I’m working on my brand, which would be all about me. And I’m working for those companies that I feel will support my brand versus the other way around. So-
MURIEL WILKINS: Versus the other way around. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, again, like your superpower has been, up until now, your superpower has been looking at yourself internally and saying, “Where am I missing the mark? And let me get stronger.” Right? And without necessarily looking outwards at the same time and saying, “Well, where’s the company missing the mark?” Right? “And is that a place that I want to be?” So as you said, be as selective with the environment that you’re in, or be as critical of the environment that you’re in as you’re doing your due diligence, as critical as you’re being for yourself when you’re being introspective and reflective and figuring out what you need to do.
RANDY: No, I agree. I think that approach is the better and it supports me doing the homework, doing the research and focusing on those things that I can bring to the table versus what the reverse of that is. So for me, that makes a heck of a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And look, here’s the thing, I think that what you’re facing is quite frankly choosing to be an outlier. And you don’t have to make that choice, right? You could say, “Hey, you know what? I’m done.” Like, “I’ve reached a certain age, I’m not going to change my skin color, I’m out.” Right? And that’s a choice. That’s a choice. And the choice becomes, if you choose the outlier choice, it really becomes, do you have the wherewithal to really be cultivating your career against what is still the norm? Okay? Do you have the wherewithal? And then the second question becomes, what’s the purpose behind making that choice? So if you think about… I mean, look, we can look at the data. There are not a tremendous amount of black individuals in the C-suite. Doesn’t mean it’s impossible, but I’m sure it’s not an easy path, and it is still an outlier. So for you, if you continue to choose that path, even if it’s in other types of organizations, I want to understand, or I want you to understand really clearly, what is the purpose behind you continuing to pursue that path?
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. His whole career, Randy has followed the work twice as hard mantra that so many underrepresented professionals use to prove that they are deserving of the role that they’re in. But that’s not working for him anymore. And now he’s considering opting out of the corporate path altogether and venturing out on his own. Now, whether Randy continues to look for C-suite roles at organizations or decides to take another road, it’s important for him to recognize that it’s a choice he’s making and it’s his choice. And he has to have clarity as to why he’s choosing a certain path. So we pick up the conversation where he reflects on just that.
RANDY: Well, I would tell you this, it is my choice, and I am deserving of those things that I’ve worked so hard for, but I have to earn them just like anyone else. And I choose that because that’s what I want to do. My biggest obstacle is fear, fear of failure. When it’s all on me, that is the biggest concern I have, if you look at something from an entrepreneurial standpoint. So for me, it’s to overcome that, systematically make sure I have countermeasures in place to offset those things that I know of, but understand that it’s okay to not have all the answers.
RANDY: I come from a generation if you didn’t have the answer, stay with a sure thing. And when you stay with a sure thing, there’s things that you may not be sure of and fearful of. And when you go out on your own, that drives into those unsure things that lead to some areas of fear and insecurity that I’ve got to face. And so I think that’s my biggest obstacle. The skills are there, the knowledge is there, the contacts are there, the ability to drive what I need to do I think is there, it’s that what I just mentioned, so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So fear of failure.
RANDY: Fear of failure. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Of being out there on your own.
RANDY: Of being out there on my own.
MURIEL WILKINS: And yet when I asked you about, or I ran by you the notion, confirmed the notion that, I think what I said is, “Hey, Randy, you strike me as the type of guy that like your whole career, you were sort of a pull it up by the bootstraps.”
RANDY: Absolutely. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And where did that get you?
RANDY: I’m bumping my head every day and dealing with things that… I’m very successful, but not to the level I want to be. I want to go beyond where I’m at and I’m not getting there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. It feels like, because you said you didn’t ask for help, you didn’t get the support, it feels like you have been on your own already.
RANDY: Well, I tell you what, life is interesting. I’m still going down the path, and I don’t want to sound like I’m going in the circle, but I’ve gone down the path of moving in the area of abdicating for me, to your point, and being of, from an old school, never giving up on a sure thing. I just mentioned that too. Taking risk means it’s all on you. So I’m about there mentally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. But so Randy, I just want to mirror, I’m going to be a little more direct, right? You’re saying that your block is, don’t give up a sure thing, fear of being out there on your own. And what I’m saying is, everything I’ve heard you say about how you have led your career so far, there has not been a sure thing.
RANDY: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you have been out there on your own. So what’s the difference? Why are you fearing something that you’ve already done?
RANDY: I guess the difference is, when you work for a company, you have a paycheck, you have insurance, you have all the things that are the trappings of the things that you need in your day-to-day life, right? When you’re on your own, those things… And to your point, I see your point. They’re still on you, but that has been my roadblock. I was just being transparent and honest. I think I’ve come to a point where those are not as big a concerns as they were. Financially, I think I am at a position where I don’t have to be fearful of those things, but I’m also of the mindset that you should always be mindful of those stakes. So save, save, save, plan, plan, plan, have a nest egg for a contingency, always, has always been my mindset. So even though I hear you and I understand what you’re saying and you’re absolutely correct, in my environment, if I didn’t have the ability to pull myself up and always do that, I wouldn’t be considered a survivor. Okay? So in that case, looking outside of a company which gives you some level of confidence, which is really none, you’re correct. I’m beyond that paradigm. That’s a paradigm in my mind. And it’s finally one that I can face openly and even say that I have that fear because in one, I’m not really open to telling my fears either publicly or my concerns, because it’s also looked at as a form of weakness. If you got to look at it from my point of view, being a black male. So the fact that I’m going to talk openly about that, I’m embracing it and I’m looking for a way to overcome that despite the fact that the history has supported that. If that makes sense, what I’m saying.
MURIEL WILKINS: It makes a ton of sense, right? And I think that… Look the fear, and I’m using quotations, like the fear that you have is not an uncommon one, it’s not an uncommon one. This notion of what is the safe choice? Where do I need security? Which is what I hear you saying is there’s a certain level of security that you have felt you needed. And that security came in the form of compensation and benefits and all the things to make sure that you could survive at the lower levels of Maslow’s hierarchy, right? Okay? Now here’s the thing, as we had advance in leadership and in life, our needs change, at least those who mature recognize that their needs change, right? And if you keep on hanging on to making sure that the things that you needed to be stable 10 years ago are still the things that you sort of equate your success with today or what you need to be stable, those are the actual things that might hold you back instead of propel you forward.
RANDY: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so the question becomes, because I’m not going to… Look, everybody needs some form of stability in their life, right? I’m not an advocate of like, just go buck wild and do whatever you want. But my question is, what are the things, or what are the areas that you actually need some security and stability in today, versus what you felt you have needed all along?
RANDY: Most of them, when you put it that way, I already have. The ones that we talked through, the risk of shelter, the risk of healthcare, the risk, there’s always risk. Something catastrophic could wipe anyone out, as you put it, the lower level of hierarchy. But I mean, at the same time, I don’t feel I have those concerns. Like I said, there’s been plenty of contingencies put aside to secure those things. So as I have matured in this process of this role we’re talking and we’re talking today, I see those as futile reasons that don’t matter anymore, whereas they did at one point. Conversation has a way of opening your eyes if you’re willing to receive. And that’s some of the beauty of this conversation here. And I see that, I think you’re getting me closer to that. And for me, sure, there’s risk, there’s risk on anything you do. But the risks are, I think in my case would be smart, calculated ones, and not like I said, there are going to be some things that I’m unaware of that I would have to plan for or react to, but I do that today. I just have an umbrella that has bigger purse strings, that if you make a mistake, you can offset it, right? But I haven’t done that in my life at all. I’ve not made those kind of mistakes. So I think I’m a sure bet for myself. It’s just getting over that hurdle that you’re a sure bet for yourself.
MURIEL WILKINS: That you’re a sure bet. Exactly. And listen, you’re the only one who can jump that hurdle.
RANDY: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what’s on the other side of that hurdle is what matters most to you. Right?
RANDY: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly what you just said, right? Like, what matters to you.
RANDY: And what matters most to me is leaving a legacy, which I’m doing every day in all the things that we’re attributed or associated with in terms of outside of the workplace, but even a more strong legacy for my family in terms of independence, where they don’t have to rely on someone else to validate or substantiate who they are and what they’re all about. And for me, that’s even more important. Let’s talk about that, right? And those are the things that I really ruminate on. So those are more important to me than anything right now. And I think that’s something that’s also in my purview.
MURIEL WILKINS: As we end our coaching conversation, Randy sees that the real question is not about why he can’t get that next C-suite level role, but more about how he can ensure his efforts are putting him closer to his ultimate goal, which is to leave a longstanding legacy. This is a different place than where he started and helps him operate with more agency in making his career choices. When he starts framing his career path from a place of self-defined purpose, rather than solely based on whether he’s accepted by others, he’s able to see more clearly what he can do to move forward and to take action in a way that’s right for him. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
Speaker 4:
And so I’m sort of at that point of being sure of myself, right? So how am I living up to this next level? Because what got you here won’t keep you here, right? I have that playing in my head and then trying to figure out how this business, it’s moving so fast.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, music composer, Brian Campbell, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com, and you can find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter,
@MurielMWilkins
or on Instagram @CoachMurielWilkins. If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.


================================================================================
Episode 12: How Do I Navigate a New Senior Role?
Year: 2021
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months but on this show, we have a one time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Kirsty to maintain her confidentiality. She’s had a number of phases in her career as a human resources professional. Recently she’s taken on a new role as vice president for global human resources at a large company. Kirsty takes a very outcomes driven approach to her leadership.
KIRSTY: I see as my primary responsibilities proactively highlighting the risks, highlighting the opportunities and holding the mirror up to leadership to say, this is how what you’re doing, how you’re leading is landing in the organization. I do think that sometimes because I’m not seeing the change in leaders that I would expect that sometimes I take on that responsibility to actually see change come out of it where I like to see change. I like to see something happen as a result of the effort. I like execution. I like seeing the outcomes of all of the work.
MURIEL WILKINS: While Kirsty’s past successes are what have led her to land this VP position, she’s feeling unsure about whether she’s being effective in her leadership role.
KIRSTY: I’m at that point of being sure of myself, right? So how am I living up to this next level? Because what got you here won’t keep you here, right? I have that playing in my head. Then trying to figure out this business. It’s moving so fast.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I start by asking her to reflect on her career this far. To tell me her career story as though it were chapters in a book.
KIRSTY: I would say the first chapter is really, I’ll call it consulting. That’s where I really got excited about my career as a junior consultant coming in and doing work around global human resource solutions and getting an opportunity to see human resources delivered in such a different way. It was a really refreshing step away from the more traditional work streams that you hear about around human resources. It was just a very different paradigm shift for me I would say. In that chapter, I would title it enlightenment if I could, right? Because it was opening this door that I knew nothing about. It just created all kinds of opportunities for me. What it did was expose me to the conversation that leaders have and equipped me with the language to use with those leaders. That’s the professional piece. The personal piece of enlightenment that came during that time was my husband and I meeting. We got married and a year later we were expecting triplets. There was just a lot that I learned about myself during that time. It had to do with not being afraid. Then I would say the second chapter, I would title it navigating the terrain. It became things changing so fast and with the children growing so fast. That having that moment where I say, am I energized by this work? Can I do both? That was a really rough period because there were times where the balance was off. It just became clear to me that I am the type of person that gets energy from what I do. That was the point where I had to learn a bit about how I can get fulfilled in different ways. I would say my third chapter is called enjoying the view. After being in that space learning about myself and then professionally, it put me at the place where the kids hit a certain point where I stepped back and said, I think I’m ready to climb the ladder now. For me, I felt like I was at that point where it all converges into something powerful, right? You’ve had these experiences where you’ve developed different skill sets and with that has come a comfort level, right? So you’re ready for the next level. That’s what led me to apply for a director level role in the company where I am now. Then my career took off where I was promoted a couple of levels and that’s where I am now.
MURIEL WILKINS: So in that capacity, what are you responsible for?
KIRSTY: I’m responsible for certain businesses within the company. That includes a couple of different business areas. The last part is strategy portfolio and operations. It’s a big role because typically a vice president, a global human resource business leader has one business group, one very large business group. That’s typically with 3,000 people in it. It really is like having your small little boutique HR company. The thing about my role which makes it a bit more complicated is having five of those leaders. How do you navigate that, right? Everybody’s different. You influence leaders differently. Some of their goals and objectives conflict yet they don’t see it. You can find yourself in a space of having to work harder than you should to influence leaders, to get them to execute and move things along. So there’s this operating at pace that doesn’t seem to happen. I think it conflicts with my personal, I don’t know, drive to operate at a certain pace. I feel like maybe I’m not as adequate at doing what I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. Yeah. It’s funny because as you were talking about how typically somebody in your role has one business but you ended up with five and I’m like, well, there seems to be a pattern with multiples.
KIRSTY: Yes. [inaudible 00:07:28] I even picked up for-
MURIEL WILKINS: For you, right. Not a coincidence that when you talked about that chapter in your life, you called it navigating the terrain and it sounds like that’s what you’re doing now.
KIRSTY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I don’t know. My hunch tells me you’re probably more well equipped than you think you are but we’ll figure that out as we go. Before we dive into what’s challenging for you now and what are the key questions that are top of mind for you, what do you think has contributed to your progression over the past four or five years?
KIRSTY: I would say I get things done. I make it happen. Systemic thinking. I do try to figure out upfront who are those key stakeholders that need to be involved, notified, briefed on things. I would say trust and credibility because I never make promises that I can’t deliver on. I also tend to deliver earlier than expected.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s bring it to the here and now. Share with me a little bit around what is the challenge that you’re facing. What’s the key question that you’re trying to answer that’ll be helpful for you?
KIRSTY: Yeah. I think for me sometimes I wonder am I being as effective as I can? What I mean by that, am I bringing my VP voice in the room? Am I comfortable with my power? Because there are moments where I just hold back and I wonder what that’s about. I do also get the sense that those above me that have promoted me to this level are waiting to see that VP presence show up.
MURIEL WILKINS: So talk to me. Share with me a little bit around those moments where you felt like you’ve held back. What did that look like?
KIRSTY: It would be with a leader, right? I don’t question them as much as I should, right? Where they state their view and I may make a comment to say, that’s interesting and let me think about that and come back to them instead of saying in the moment, highly unlikely this would work. Being really there to challenge them in a respectful way but to challenge them. Now the interesting thing is, after working with a leader for a certain amount of time, I do get to that place but it takes me longer than I should at this point in my career.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I’m just curious around the where do you think it should be and how soon do you think you should able to get comfortable or challenge those leaders? What’s your metric there?
KIRSTY: My metric is within 30 days of working with them. I feel like I should be able to get there particularly given that my knowledge of the rest of the organization. But within 30 days of working with them, I should have that enough, I don’t know, information, enough comfort to be able to push back.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what’s happening as a result of you not pushing back in that timeframe?
KIRSTY: It creates this space where they’re not sure about what I think and how I truly view things. In an instance, a leader did ask me, what do you think about this particular person on my team? I said to them I don’t know. I haven’t worked with them enough. [inaudible 00:11:17] to see more of them in order to form an opinion. That sat with me in a way where I thought should I know this sooner? Is there something I’m missing here where I need to be moving faster, accelerating these relationships?
MURIEL WILKINS: As a result of not pushing back or accelerating your ability to do that, to assert your voice because that’s what I’m hearing, you’re really hoping to be at a place where you can assert your point of view and perspective and really advise as you did when you were a consultant, advise in a much sooner way than you’re doing now. If that does not happen, what will happen? What’s the end all impact of you not doing that?
KIRSTY: Then it starts to question my capability. Does she really understand what’s happening? That’s my fear. I’m not sure if that’s the reality but that’s my fear.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. KIRSTY is extraordinarily self-reflective and has a high level of awareness of what she’s experiencing in her new role. While she’s worried that she’s not asserting herself in the way she thinks she should, that’s not really her concern. The thing she’s really worried about is that she won’t come across as credible to other executives.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in our conversation, it’s important that KIRSTY gains clarity on what is really worrying her so that she can solve for that versus just what is happening at the surface. I continue to follow her line of thinking and dig for the so what. What if the executives question her credibility, then what?
KIRSTY: I don’t know if it’s a bit of a knock for my ego because I’ve been moving at such a quick pace and I’ve felt energized and excited by the work. Maybe it makes me feel less than adequate and starts to chip away at my confidence.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want to understand in those moments, like that example that you gave around the executive who asked you, what do you think about this person on my team? You said, I’m not sure. I haven’t worked with them well enough. Give me some time. What made you say that? What made you not share your perspective right then and there?
KIRSTY: I do feel that particularly at my level, things that you say can create a halo effect for people. I’m just very mindful of making that mistake of mislabeling someone. I feel like it’s a bit of a super power that you’re given in this space where you really can impact the trajectory of someone’s career. I tend to hold back a bit until I have more data.
MURIEL WILKINS: So on your end, it’s if you did not have the right data or if you mislabeled, how do you think that would have imp… What would’ve been the impact of that?
KIRSTY: That leader questioning or having a totally different view than me and questioning, well, does she really know the people on my team because what she [inaudible 00:14:38] is not how I see that person or that leader using that information to make talent decisions.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what I’m hearing you say is two risks. One is that they use information in a way that then has an impact on others and there’s a risk that then it’s misused-
KIRSTY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: …because it’s not the full data. But I also heard you say that if they disagree with you, then they would question your credibility which interestingly enough is also the reason why you said, if you don’t speak up, right? They might question your credibility. There’s this sort of damned if you do, damned if you don’t position that you’ve put yourself in around if I speak up, they might not think I’m credible and if I don’t speak up, they might not think I’m credible.
KIRSTY: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s this one aspect of credibility and capability that we want to look at because it sounds to me like it has come up from a place of you actually believing in your capability. What is different now than what it has been for the past number of years where you’ve progressed quite well?
KIRSTY: It’s the level that I’m at. This vice president level. I think it gets to this is a new space for me. Do I belong in this room? Is there something additional expected of me at this level that I’m not giving and I just don’t know what it is?
MURIEL WILKINS: Have you been in similar situations before where you are in a completely new space that has additional responsibilities of scope and you’re not quite sure if you’re doing it right?
KIRSTY: Yes. I would say even starting out as a consultant, I didn’t even know that world existed before I sat down with the [inaudible 00:16:53] cracked his head and had a conversation with him. I would say personally, the children. I totally knew I never babysat any children growing up. I didn’t know how to feed a baby, right? Totally new space for me. Uncharted territory.
MURIEL WILKINS: So this is good news and bad news, right? The good news is, it might not look like the exact same terrain but you have navigated similar terrain. The bad news is you’ve done it before. As a coach, I love to hear that because I’m like, okay, well then let’s figure out what has worked for you in the past to help you build your confidence in being able to navigate this terrain. I think it’s important we do that first before we get into the blocking and tackling of what can you actually do as a VP. So tell me, if you think back in those situations where it was new, it was complicated, scope was big, it seemed overwhelming, what enabled you to successfully ramp up and get through it?
KIRSTY: I broke it down into little pieces. Where do I start? What’s the most important piece? Solving it bit by bit. So not letting the situation feel as big as it was but just taking it step by step. The other thing I’ve done is, I’ve operated with this level of openness and excitement. Say instead of recognizing that it’s new and different and letting that dictate my feelings, me saying let me embrace this. Let me learn all that I can about this.
MURIEL WILKINS: So to what extent have you taken both of those attributes, right? Your ability to break things down. Then attribute number two which is you’ve approached it with a sense of openness and excitement rather than, oh my God, this is new and different, right? So if those were the two wings that you navigated those terrains with, to what extent have you used both of those wings in this particular situation at your new level as a VP?
KIRSTY: I don’t know that I have used them. I’ve been more frozen by the experience because maybe it feels bigger than what it really is. I probably could do more of both.
MURIEL WILKINS: Maybe there’s a bit here around as you work with those other executives around breaking what their agendas are down into smaller manageable pieces so you can then prioritize where is it that you can add value. Then this piece around approaching it with openness and excitement. If you were to take that perspective on rather than the perspective of being frozen by the experience, what would that look like? What would the difference be?
KIRSTY: The difference would be the confidence. I think that’s where it will show up. The confidence that I have in myself and the skillsets that I know I have and that I deserve to be at this level. When I look at my career path, that’s the direct impact to the confidence.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what you’re touching on Kirsty is you being able to hold that you’re relatively new in the role and you have a perspective that you can bring to the table. The two do not have to be mutually exclusive.
KIRSTY: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I applaud you for being able to recognize that when you are in that tension, you tend to freeze because you don’t know which way to go. Do I stay with the I’m new, so I don’t say anything or do I really leverage the confidence that I know I’ve had in the past and speak. Freezing is not a viable option.
KIRSTY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Choosing one or the other is also not a viable option because it means you’re either pulling back completely or you’re pushing forward in a way that may have a negative impact on the organization. So what choice do we have but then to hold the end. How can I continue to be a learner and at the same time offer perspective. You can do that by messaging, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: So if we were to go back to that example that you gave around the executive who asked you what do you think about this team member? You were to have that conversation again but in a way where you held the end, I’m a learner and I have a perspective, how would you show up this time around?
KIRSTY: I would say, this is my perception of working with them so far. I’d list out what my perception is. I’d give a couple of examples. I’d also say, but let me caveat that with the fact that I don’t know them well. I still want to get to know them more either to prove, further confirm my perceptions or shift my perception.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So you can caveat it, right?
KIRSTY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: What else would’ve given you more of an inner sense of confidence in responding not only that but also quite frankly approach the other executive at the same level that they’re at?
KIRSTY: Yeah. What gives me that level of confidence is knowing what I’m walking into. If we knew that I was going to take him on and his business and I had that opportunity to learn about his style, what he likes, what he doesn’t like, what’s important to him and I didn’t have any of that with him.
MURIEL WILKINS: In lieu of having that because I mean this isn’t the last time that you won’t have all that background information, right? In lieu of having that, what strategies or approach do you think you can take to give you more context?
KIRSTY: I could connect with others who know this person, right? Who’s worked with this person. Those are ways that I can get more context.
MURIEL WILKINS: By now Kirsty has faced the root of the issue for her. Does she belong in the room? It’s clear that question has impacted her confidence. As a result, she unintentionally sees no other option when facing executives but to not voice her perspective and not assert herself. So the question becomes, how does she turn this around? It starts by KIRSTY recognizing that she does have other choices in how to approach her interactions. Only when she can see what her other options are will she be able to bring her voice into the room with more confidence. Your ability to bring your voice into the room. I’m not even going to call it your VP voice because I think it’s actually your voice. It just happens to be in a VP [inaudible 00:24:47], right? So you’ve always had that voice but it’s now bringing it into this particular room or your ability as you said, to use your power. Your power really lies in your capacity to see the choices in front of you of how to deal with that particular situation. You feel powerless when you feel like you don’t have options. In that moment, what you probably experienced is, I don’t want to say anything. I can’t say anything. My only option is to not say anything because any other option will potentially put me at risk of not being incredible and showing up as though I don’t know what I’m talking about or somebody doing something reckless with my information. So my only option is to not say anything. What I would encourage you to do is, when you think about yourself, how do I use my power? It’s to be able to say, okay, actually let me see the situation for what it is. Not bigger than what it is. Just for what it is and what options do I have right now. I can share information. I can caveat it. I can ask for context. I can mitigate risk, right? So my guess is this is showing up in a couple of different areas around this how can I accelerate the use of my voice?
KIRSTY: I would say amongst my peers. So I’m at this level with individuals who have been vice presidents in this company for probably over 20 years. There is a way of operating at that level. Then you have a couple who are relatively new to the level coming in with probably different experiences because we’ve worked different places and different viewpoints. I believe that my leaders are waiting for me to show up as a leader in that space, right? A leader of leaders. They’re waiting for me to show up that way amongst my peers who have been at this level for a while. I find myself in that same space of holding back exactly some of the items that we’ve talked about before.
MURIEL WILKINS: Do you have a sense for those stakeholders? What their expectations are in terms of what it means for you to step up?
KIRSTY: I haven’t asked that question.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because on the one hand, I think it’s great that you feel an inner sense of I feel like I don’t have a voice, right? We’ve dug into why that is but you’re also doing this within a system. It’s helpful to also understand what does the system see as success. You don’t have to do that in a way that is… I mean a lot of times you’re like, that’s feedback. I don’t think is a feedback exercise. I think this is a… Because you’ve now been in the role how long? Six months.
KIRSTY: About six to nine months. Probably not [inaudible 00:28:12].
MURIEL WILKINS: Six to nine months. Perfect opportunity to do a onboarding pulse check listening to.
KIRSTY: I love that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Identify who these key stakeholders are. Sit down with them. Say, now I’ve been in the role six to nine months. What’s working well? What’s not working well? More importantly, what are your expectations moving forward? What do you need from the role? Not from you, from the role. What does success look like 12 to 18 months from now? Get a sense of what the expectations are. Not so that then you can cater to every single expectation. But what that will enable you to do is take that information back and now be able to sit down and do exactly use one of the wings that has been your superpower in past jobs when you’ve had to navigate terrain. Be able to sit back and say, okay, now I can break this down into manageable chunks and I can prioritize. Because I get the sense that right now what’s happened is, it’s this vast ocean and you’re just like, try to find your way, you’re soaring. You’re like, it’s big. That’s all I know. It’s big. You’re swooping in here and there and making impact. Now is the time to reign it in and quite frankly, to set your own agenda but you don’t want to do that in a vacuum. You want to do that being informed by what the expectations of your stakeholder in the business are.
KIRSTY: Yes. You’ve tapped directly into how I’m feeling. What you just described is exactly what’s happening. It’s a big ocean and I’m diving into certain pieces but… That leaves me with a sense of feeling out of control. That feeling feeds into this question in my mind around, do I belong here?
MURIEL WILKINS: So it’s a vicious cycle. When you feel out of control, what you’ve done in the past is you’ve taken a step back. You’ve prioritized. You’ve figured out what needs to get done. You’ve lasered in on the things that are most important. The things that you want to accelerate or identifying what are the most critical aspects of your role. Because right now, do you have an agenda for what your role is? Do you have a sense of what your priorities are and how much it resonates with the rest of the organization?
KIRSTY: I guess that interesting part is when I start to look at it across the different businesses, is where it varies. That adds to the complexity.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you can imagine the T formation. You have gotten the breadth of strategically, here are the three or four areas that I’m going to be focused on. Here is the framework at a high level. But what seems to be where there’s opportunity for you is the depth in each of the businesses and even more so than the businesses, each of the individuals, right? I would encourage you now to start thinking about what does it look like for you to now go deep? You’ve done the breadth. How do you go deep to ramp up on your knowledge and your perspective? Because once you have a point of view, then you can have actually start articulating it.
KIRSTY: That begins to create this confidence and comfort and understanding where I need to hone in with each of these businesses. So [inaudible 00:32:21] been a very thoughtful, intentional way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. Absolutely. Look, I think it’s great to build the confidence. I’m going to suggest that you don’t hold onto the confidence so tightly that when it goes, you’re like, oh my God, I’m starting all over again because you’re not. Many of us are confidence chasers.
KIRSTY: I love that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like the tornado chasers. We’re confidence chasers. I mean, confidence is great. Believe me. Yes, I want everybody to be confident. It’s also a feeling, right? It’s how you’re experiencing that moment. Where I would like to see you is whether you’re feeling confident or not confident, you’re going to deal with the moment. Whether you’re feeling confident or not confident, do you see the choices? You have to know what your choice are which we’ve talked about. It’s the different ways of communicating. You have to see the choices in terms of the horizontal and the depth. The depth being the business and then the individual leaders that you’re dealing with.
KIRSTY: I love that. The power and the confidence is just the feeling but really defining what power is. That resonates with me so deeply. Because what I thought coming into the discussion was around confidence and using my voice is really more around, do I even understand what the power is and where it lies and how to leverage that and use that. It’s very insightful.
MURIEL WILKINS: I feel like we have covered a lot.
KIRSTY: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’d love to hear, one, what your takeaways are. Then two, what you’re going to do differently tomorrow.
KIRSTY: Yeah. I would say I have a few takeaways. Where do I even start? One is understanding all of the capabilities, skillsets, power, confidence that I do have from my life experiences and how they compare to work. So with me being hesitant to tackle certain issues or not having that confidence to tackle certain issues. The realization that I’ve done it before in my life and being able to carry that over. That’s one thing. I think the other takeaway is my wings, right? Of breaking it down into pieces and the other wing of approaching the way I approach things with the level of openness. That was just very insightful and resonated with me. Then the other pieces of course around power and what power is. It’s seeing the choices in front of you and seeing all the options. That in fact would give me confidence to show up and differently being able to articulate my views and also being comfortable enough to be very directive around how someone uses information that I give them. I love the T factor analogy. The breadth and the depth of helping me get more focused. For me, those are the takeaways. What I will do differently starting tomorrow, even tonight even, is journal my perceptions and really think about each of the businesses and be prepared to have some questions for those leaders when I meet with them again.
MURIEL WILKINS: One last question for you. Do you have… What are your sounding boards internally? Who do you go to, to just run things by and get a sense of what’s happening?
KIRSTY: There’s definitely a couple of individuals that I trust. I have to say hand on heart, I have not been leveraging them as much as I could. They’ve been at this level for a while in this organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think you need to have your internal board of advisors. Because in addition to this image that I have of you seeing the whole ocean, I get this image that you’re flying on your own and it doesn’t sound like you are. One of the things that’s very helpful… I mean, there’s the cliche of it gets lonelier as you rise up the ladder and it’s true. But it doesn’t have to be. The difference is that we have to ask for the support. Couple with people who are sounding boards. Set up regular conversations with them. Will then enable you to kick the tires around some of your perspective as well as learn more about what it means to operate at this level in this particular organization.
KIRSTY: Yeah. I know exactly who those individuals are. Capturing their [inaudible 00:38:11] now.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s great. I think we have landed the plane.
KIRSTY: Yes. This has been amazing. This experience has been absolutely amazing. You’ve unlocked so many things for me. I really appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, you’ve unlocked them. I just play back what you said. Thank you. Kirsty is not alone in experiencing a crisis of confidence when starting a more senior role. It can happen to anyone and make you question if you even belong at this new level. That’s why Kirsty’s ability to be honest with herself about the root of her uncertainty enabled her to then move to action in a way that reflects that she’s both a learner and a contributor. It is at this intersection where her voice truly lies. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
and for season two of the show. I’d love to hear what your favorite episode was this season and what you learned from it. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, please reach out. You can apply to be a guest on the show at coachingrealleaders.com. You can also find me on LinkedIn or on Twitter
@MurielMWilkins
or on Instagram @CoachMurielWilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, music composer Brian Campbell and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you our listeners who shared in their journeys. Of course, if you love the show and learnt from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, leave a review. From HBR Presents, this is Muriel Wilkins.

