
================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Get Promoted Without a Clear Career Path?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: HBR Presents. I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sam to protect his confidentiality. He’s worked in finance at a major company where he’s been for over a decade. He’s a self-professed very natural finance guy.
SAM: My long-term goal is to be a CFO over the five- to 10-year period of time. And I knew in order to get there, I need to start from somewhere and make my way up from there. So, when I joined this business three, four years ago, I had update conversation with my manager that, “Hey, even though I’m joining for a different role, but the role which I’m doing now, that’s the kind of role which I always want to go.” So, the moment that opportunity came up, I immediately grabbed onto it. I had a good conversation with my manager. Of course, we went through the formal interview process with my current GM and with the HR, but I’m glad that everything fell in place and I was put on the board to lead this role.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sam has now been leading a team within the broader business for a few years, and he’s responsible for hitting major revenue targets. So far, managing his career progression has worked out relatively well, but now he’s starting to feel a bit stuck.
SAM: When I think of my roles and responsibilities, it was an upward move for sure, because I have more exposure and I’m delivering a number to the company. But in terms of my title, it was a lateral move. And I’ve been on that title for the last six, seven years now. And I’ve been pushing to get to the middle management, I would say, in the organization hierarchy. So, if I try to put myself right now, I am somewhere between the lower to middle of the middle management. I’m trying to push myself more into the middle or the upper middle management, more into the executive level, I would say.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sam is facing an issue that many in middle management face, where the opportunities to take on more responsibilities in your current role or through a lateral move are plentiful, but the upward path to a more senior role seems less clear. Let’s jump into the coaching session now, as I ask Sam how he’s tried to push himself to the next level and what he thinks is holding him back from getting there.
SAM: There could be many reasons. I mean, I’ve been pushing, Muriel, to get to the executive level. Even though I get excellent feedback all the time, but I feel like that’s not getting translated somehow into my upward move. Now, why it’s not getting translated, there could be one or two very specific skills, which somebody should have to get to the executive level, which probably I may not have, but I feel like I’m not getting those clear and direct feedback that, “Hey, Sam, you need to do X, Y, Z to get to the executive level.”
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, what I’m hearing is you have had a pretty successful career. You were moved into this role or took opportunity to take this role, which you see as a stepping stone for your longer term aspiration of being a more general CFO, a broader CFO. When you took this opportunity, it was a lateral move from a title perspective, but the responsibility and the scope of the role was broader than the type of responsibility and scope that you had previously.
SAM: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so at this point, your desire is to have a promotion in title that is commensurate with what you see as the role and responsibility that would position you for more of the executive level?
SAM: Absolutely. And the other thing we can also add is that it may not be this role which I should be entitled to get to the executive role, it may be another role which much more better, bigger exposure, much more wider responsibilities, which can take me there. So, what I just clearly need to know is, what is that path? What does that path look like? What do I need to do X, Y, Z, A, B, C to get there? And then if tomorrow, if any similar role opens up, would I be fit for that role? Or what else do I need to do in current role so that whenever in the future that role opens up, my management feels that, Yes, Sam has delivered all these things to the business, and he’s a right fit for that role, and let’s put him on the path for the promotion’?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I just want to make sure that we understand what the question is. Well, let me ask you, if you were to frame this as a question, what would be the question?
SAM: So, my question would be, what do I need to do to get to the promotion in the management hierarchy, to get to the executive level?
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so we have some focus now. So, let me ask you this, have you been considered for positions that would have gotten you promoted?
SAM: I don’t think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: You don’t think so, or you don’t know?
SAM: I don’t think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And what makes you not think so?
SAM: Just because my management never spoke with me on those positions. I mean, I would say if I go back last one year, there have been a couple of positions which got opened up at the executive level, but my management never asked me that, “Hey Sam, are you interested to take over that position?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, they never asked you. How did you approach those open opportunities?
SAM: I honestly did not approach those opportunities because maybe somehow, I thought in the heart of my heart that even though I may go and talk about it, I may get an answer as, “no.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So… what stopped you from pursuing those opportunities that were open, that you saw potentially could be the types of opportunities that if somebody else had presented you for, you would’ve been a good candidate for, but what I’m hearing you say is you didn’t present yourself because you thought if you presented yourself, you might get a “no”?
SAM: Right. And now I’m kind of thinking about it more. The two opportunities which opened up, they were not in a place where I wanted to be, in terms of the city. They were completely at a different location. Also, considering about my family and everything, I intentionally didn’t pursue too much about those roles, if you know what I mean. I was interested in those roles, but then I felt that I’m not really interested in moving to those cities, so I did not push myself for that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the only thing I want to highlight is your level of interest may help inform others’ interest in helping and supporting you. It may or it may not. What I think would be helpful to explore is, when there are opportunities that open up, that you are interested in, what do you do to advocate for yourself for those opportunities, and what are your expectations of others? Okay?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would have happened if they had actually suggested that you pursue one of those opportunities? What would have happened?
SAM: I think would have more enthusiastic pursuing those. And I may have tried to come up with some alternatives on which I was holding myself back. I may have come up with some alternatives or situations where I would’ve said, “Okay, if that’s a bigger picture, if that’s where I want to move, what can I do? What alternatives I can bring in, which can help me to get to that position?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what I’m not understanding though is on the one hand you’re saying, “I didn’t pursue those opportunities because you know what? Quite frankly, location wise, it wasn’t ideal. So, I didn’t even want to put myself in front of it because it’s probably not something I would want to do. But if somebody else thinks it’s a good idea, then yeah, I might be more excited about doing it.” And I’m curious, what’s the difference? Why does it matter if somebody is excited about it versus you being excited about it?
SAM: That’s a good point. Maybe I can also add is maybe somehow, somewhere, maybe 10% or 20%, I had a fear of getting the answer “no” and then getting demotivated about it; meaning, if I would have approached to my management like, “Hey, I want to approach for that role, that role fits me, and that’s where I want to be, that’s what my aspiration is,” and I felt that there would be a greater probability of getting an answer no, then it could have demotivated me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And maybe what could have also happened is, “Oh, you know what? Okay, let’s see what happens. Let’s put you in the pipeline and see if it works out.” We don’t know. We don’t know. I’m not saying that’s what would’ve happened, but we actually don’t know. What we do know is that where you are now is exactly where you would be if you had gone and they had said no. You would’ve ended up right back where you are now.
SAM: Got it, got it. So, I feel like if I’m hearing you, you are suggesting that I should speak up; meaning, I should go put forward my thoughts, irrespective of the answer, and then see where that discussion leads to?
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I’m not suggesting anything, I’m just laying out to you what the possible outcomes could be, right?
SAM: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And one of those routes could be exactly what you just said, because inherent in what you were sharing before is, it sounds like you think that you could be a fit for a type of promotion, but you haven’t gotten any type of external feedback to check against that assumption. That’s what you haven’t gotten. What I haven’t heard you say is that nobody has said to you… I mean correct me if I’m wrong, but it doesn’t sound like anybody has said to you, “Don’t put yourself forward for any promotions.”
SAM: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a difference between the two, and I think you’ve shut down one avenue… as a result of something completely different that’s happening. So, do you go down that path of, “Hey, maybe I should put myself forward and see what happens?” I don’t know. I mean ultimately, it’s up to you. All we’re doing right now is saying, what other paths do you have beyond what’s happening right now, which is waiting for somebody to approach you and say, “Hey Sam, here you go”? On a silver platter, “Here’s the promotion you’ve been waiting for.”
SAM: Yeah, no, that’s right. Understood.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here for a moment to gauge what’s happening. Sam came into the conversation wanting me to tell him specifically what to do, but what’s more important is for him to gain clarity on the options he has in front of him. That’s why as I coach Sam, I spend time helping him tease out the different paths he can take. This is to help him move from focusing on “Why isn’t this career advancement happening” to “What are ways I can make this happen?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s jump back into the conversation, as I walk him through what-if scenarios as a way for him to see what’s possible beyond his current situation. Let’s say an opportunity came up next week, and you had choices in front of you. One choice is, “I’m not going to do anything. I’m going to wait to see if they call me.” Okay, that’s what you’ve done. The other choice is, “I’m going to,” as you put it, “speak up for myself,” or we think about it as “advocate for myself,” and “raise my hand. Raise my hand that this is something I want to put my name forward with.” So, let’s play out that scenario.
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: What could possibly happen?
SAM: So, I would say I will go with a latter scenario, that I will raise my hand, and I will go and present myself for that position, and I would also build a case around it, like why I think I’m fit for that position with all the point by point, kind of like my profile with my background and why I’m fit for that role. Also, I can also throw in a couple of points where I feel that there may be some development needs which may be required for that role, and this is what my plan is to immediately get to the learning curve of that role. But yeah, so to answer your question is, I would go with that approach, put my best foot forward, and then see whatever the result happens, it happens. At the end of the day, if the answer is no, then I’m back to what I’m working even currently, so no changes, but at least… I have presented myself, I have created some noise, and maybe now my management and maybe HR or other people would know that “Sam wants to pursue those type of positions, and let’s keep him in mind, and let’s work on his development needs to get up there.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, absolutely. So, as you said, there are two options. You can go, they can say no, and at least now they know, right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: You can go, they can say yes, and you get it. Okay?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: If they say no, not only do they know, it also leaves an opening to then seek the very thing that we started this conversation with, which is, “Okay, so what’s missing?” Right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: “Can you please give me some feedback around what is it that I don’t have that would have positioned me well for this particular promotion?” And it creates an opening. Do you get it? Maybe. We don’t know, but at least it creates an opening. Okay?
SAM: Yeah, it makes sense. It makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s important here, that I’m hearing, is this sense of advocating for yourself… rather than waiting for somebody to advocate for you. That’s not to say that somebody advocating for you wouldn’t be nice. Absolutely, it would. In fact, have you had anyone advocate for you, which is usually what we call having a sponsor? Have you had sponsors?
SAM: So, that’s a really, really great point, Muriel, you mentioned, is I feel that’s another reason, which is kind of holding me back, is that our overall company has been through a lot of restructuring and reorganization lately, over the last few years, and I have lost a lot of my sponsors in the company. So, to your point, in the past, yes, my sponsors have spoken for me. A couple of my sponsors, they pulled me as their business leader to run the business for them. But where I stand today, and if I look back over the last 10 plus years I’ve been with the company, almost 90 to 95% of my sponsors and colleagues, I have lost. They are no more there with the company. So that’s why for me, it has been kind of like it restarting my whole life with the same company all over again, building the new relationship with the colleagues, finding a new sponsor, finding the great business partners who can speak for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: And where do you feel you are in cultivating those new sponsored relationships?
SAM: I think I’m doing very well. I’m doing very well. And this was kind of the role which I had needed because I have the team, I have the GM, who I report into. I feel like it may be just a matter of time to get there and then continue to hold my position and continue to deliver what the business needs from me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what we’re talking about is really having a parallel path, advocating for yourself and having others who advocate for you in the form of sponsors. Right?
SAM: It makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve well-articulated that you have had sponsors, but because of the changes in the company, that has dropped off, and you’re now in the process of rebuilding. Which mean, if you’re under… We can talk kind of finance terms with you, if you’re under indexing on others advocating for you, where do you need to be in advocating for yourself?
SAM: Even much more higher.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. You need to be over indexing.
SAM: Over indexing. Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? More so than you normally would. And so, what I’m interested in is what is your regular baseline, normally would, right? What’s your normal baseline of advocating for yourself? What does that look like?
SAM: I would say it’s pretty decent. I over pitch myself. In the over pitch, what I mean is, whenever I see some sort of an opportunity to help a business on something or to take some sort of an initiative, I quickly assess what that need is, what that problem statement we are trying to solve for, and I’m usually one of the people who will raise their hand like, “Hey, this is something which I can do and I can help on.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So that is advocating for yourself on behalf of the business?
SAM: Yes, on behalf of the business. Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so how do you do in advocating for yourself on behalf of yourself?
SAM: So, help me with a couple of examples, please, if I… Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. So, you just said, “Hey, I see a business need. There’s an opportunity, something needs to be done. I think there would be an improvement.” I raise my hand and I say, “Hey, here’s the need. I can help this need. Here’s how I would help. Let me do it.” Okay? That’s advocating. Yes, you’re doing it. You’re identifying a need, and the result is it will help the business.
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What I’m asking is, how do you use those same skills to help Sam’s career?
SAM: So, the skills which I develop is, as I’m solving those problems for the business, either I make some new relationships or I collaborate more. And if there is a more compelling need at that point for the business, and I am solving for them, then I get the appreciation, and then I put my name again in the hat, “Sam is one of those person who is always proactive and always ready to help.” And that puts me a little bit more forward than the rest of my crew.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What it strikes me as is we talk about the notion of letting the work speak for itself. Right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: You do good work and that reflects on Sam. And if you do the good work and you show the results, then that puts Sam a little bit further along the line, right?
SAM: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the work does speak for itself, but the work doesn’t always tell the full story. And I think the missing part here is, what part of the story do you need to tell? And what I’m curious about is, what conversations have you had or not had that are explicitly about what it is that you want for your career next?
SAM: I think the conversation which I have not had is again, To get to that executive level, which I am aiming for, what do I need to do? What are my stepping stones to get there? Is it my current role will lead me to there? If I continue to deliver in my current role, will that lead me there one day? Or if not, then maybe have some sort of a session with my manager, with my HR maybe, is, What could be the other things I could be doing to position myself to get there?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s to hold you back from having that conversation with HR or with your manager?
SAM: So, I did have that conversation earlier this year, as we were doing the performance evaluation of last year. So, I kick started that conversation again with my manager. And again, I didn’t get any clear answer or the feedback as to what those things should be to get me there.
MURIEL WILKINS: What did you get?
SAM: That they are presenting me, that they are putting my name out there, and I need to continue to do what I’m doing, and let’s wait for the future.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SAM: I mean I’m kind of rethinking now, it’s been a few months now, but those were just those couple of sentences of the answers I got is, I’m being presented and I need to continue to do what I’m doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And how many data points did you get around? Is that one person who said that to you? Your manager, is it?
SAM: So, my manager, and I did try to talk with my HR, but I didn’t get the clear answer. They told me to talk to my manager.
MURIEL WILKINS: They told you to talk to your… Okay.
SAM: Yeah, they can’t reveal too many things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. This is helpful because it sounds like you’re getting a bit of a vague response.
SAM: And that’s exactly what I’m getting to – is that I keep getting these vague responses. Where it’ll be really helpful for me to get very discreet and specific things, “These are the two, three things that need to be done”, or “It may take a few years down the line,” so that I can manage my whole thing around that rather than sitting myself and holding it, why it’s not happening,
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, why it’s not happening. And the backdrop around that is how you’ve performed, right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because what we’ve been talking about is your potential and how do you fulfill the potential that you believe you have, and you’re looking for that direct path. What we haven’t talked about is what’s your current performance? So, the backdrop, you mentioned that some of these conversations have happened during performance review. What is the state of your performance? How are you seen currently in your role in terms of how you’re rated performance-wise?
SAM: So, I got the second best rating, if I can say it that way. There are four or five levels of ratings. So I got the second best rating.
MURIEL WILKINS: And do you have a sense from a promotion standpoint how the rate… I know it’s not only ratings, but what one expects to… see in a promotional candidate from a readiness standpoint?
SAM: No, I didn’t get the clear answers.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So, you’re not getting clear answers. So, usually, when we think about somebody who is… And I don’t have the clear answer either, because I’m not in your organization, and I would be using a crystal ball to tell you this is exactly what it is, okay?
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because there’s a couple of sides to it. On the one hand, it could be, are the opportunities actually there? That’s what we’ve talked about. If you see an opportunity, then you should at least present yourself for it and see what happens. The other is, are you being seen as somebody who is ready to pursue those opportunities?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, a helpful way to think about promotion readiness is against two variables – and I’m not the one who made this up. This is sort of what’s behind what’s called the “nine block for talent management.” The first question is, how do you, Sam, perform currently? How do you perform against your current role? Low, medium, high. And then the second question is, to what extent do you demonstrate future potential? And future potential of what? We have to define what that potential is. What are we talking about? In this case, probably the executive level. And all we know right now is where you are in terms of current performance. But those who are seen as ready for promotion are usually the ones who index high on both of those variables. So, they’re knocking it out of the park, current performance, and they demonstrate at a high-level, future potential for the next level. And depending where they are on the other areas, then we can… Are there areas that you need to develop? And I think what you’re asking is, “Hey, I’m doing pretty good on the current performance. I’m not quite sure if I’m demonstrating future potential. I think I’m high, but I’m not sure because I don’t know how you’re defining future potential. And if you could tell me if I’m low or medium, then at least then I know what the gaps are to fill.”
SAM: No, it makes sense. I think you’ve framed it very well here.
MURIEL WILKINS: And to complicate matters, you’re going and asking your manager, and you’re not getting a clear response. You’re going and asking HR, they’re not giving you a clear response. And what are you attributing to the fact that they’re not giving you a clear response? Why do you think they’re not giving you a clear response?
SAM: It could be that there are not many opportunities at executive level, what it used to be even few years ago. I mean, unfortunately they are [inaudible 00:26:20] a lot. Businesses have shrunk a lot. The executive level people are not moving around much, so that you know if they are not moving around, they’re not creating the spaces for the other folks to move up or move around. So, I feel like there is not enough opportunities at the organizational level, hence, I’m not getting the clear answer. The other thing would be is that if they give me the clear answer that, “Hey, Sam, let’s do these couple of things,” or for example, “You need another two, three years to get there,” where we are in terms of the whole economy or the environment right now, where a lot of people are leaving the organizations and moving on with other organizations, they may have the similar fear that, Hey, if we give Sam a clear answer like, ‘Hey, he needs to wait for another couple of years,’ maybe we’ll lose him.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. So, this is the situation, all right? You don’t have the answer. You could go seek the answer from others; meaning mentors, the sponsors that you’re cultivating. And they might be able to give you some idea. But right now, all we know is you don’t have the answer. We don’t really know exactly why. I think all the reasons you stated are very plausible. And there are probably other reasons. I mean, maybe it was a trick question that I said, why do you think? Because we might know the reason, and actually, it doesn’t really matter because you’re not getting an answer. Okay?
SAM: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the real question is, what do you do without an answer? And so I just want us to kind of imagine. Let’s say you didn’t get an answer for the next six months, what would you do differently than you’re doing now?
SAM: I may push myself if there are more opportunities, if I can find someone else within the company who can be a sponsor of me to put in that position, which I believe is going to be very difficult because I think I have tried that, since a lot of things have changed in the company, and I don’t have those relationships outside of my small organization, which I lead in. So, it may be very difficult. But then for me is if I don’t get that clear answer, then I may start seeking job opportunities.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, here’s the thing, you have a question and you want an answer. You’re not getting the answer that you want, which is basically, because you’re not getting any answer. So, either nothing changes and you just keep on doing what you’ve been doing, which is waiting for the answer to your question, hoping that it happens. And it might and it might not, but you wait. That’s what option number one.
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Option number two is you change the question. And changing the question might be changing from, “How do I position myself or ready myself for the promotion, or what makes me promotable” to “How do I continue to do this job as effectively as I can? You told me I need to keep doing what I’m doing. Okay, what does that look like?” That’s just one, but you changed the question. Option number three is you change the answer that you’re seeking, or you give yourself your own answer, which is what you were just talking about.
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think the path here is starting to create scenarios for yourself so that you can, in a sense, sort of take back some power, some control around your career management in response to what you’re getting right now. And I think the decision path is, do you wait? Do you continue pushing for this feedback that you’re seeking and wait, which is fine, that’s completely up to you, or do you say, “Okay, I might wait ‘til X period of time and then I’m going to take a different move”? It’s not a move that’s waiting. It’s a different move. And what could those moves be? Those are the two options.
SAM: Yeah. It makes sense to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. In what way does it make sense to you?
SAM: It helps me kind of develop a more timeline around my career path and approach with more clear sense of direction, like these are the one or two things I need to be talking with my manager next time, try to get some more clear answer, a path which can take me there. And if I’m not getting the right answers or the clear answers, if I’m not getting the clear direction, maybe I wait for some time. And if that trend continues for quite some time, then I go with my next option, which is to move.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, at the end of the day, for me, it has no bearing on me whether you stay or you move or you do. What I am seeing is you shifting from a passive recipient of what happens in your career, to taking a more active approach in advocating for yourself. And advocating for yourself doesn’t always need to be, “Hey, I’m putting myself up for promotion.” Not that there’s anything wrong with that, and obviously I would want you to do that, too. But advocating for yourself is saying, “Okay, let me go ask for that feedback. I’m not getting that feedback, then what’s the next move?” Or “I’m not going to make the next move, I’m going to stay and I’m going to wait, but I know why I’m doing it.” As long as there’s a purpose behind it and it’s your purpose, nobody can take that away from you. That’s your purpose. As long as you know the reason why you’re waiting for the feedback or you’re not waiting for the feedback. It’s your purpose. And once you have a strong sense of what that is and that’s what’s driving you, that’s a very different stance than waiting for somebody to give you the direction. You are the one – and I’m pointing at you. You provide the direction. This is a critical shift for Sam. He starts seeing that it’s his choice whether he manages his career as a passive recipient waiting for what he needs, or if he actively manages his career by advocating for what he needs and driving the process. Which stance he chooses, informs which actions will follow. Let’s dive back in as Sam realizes how his approach so far has impacted him and what he wants to do differently moving forward.
SAM: I do have a defined purpose what I want to do, where do I want to go, but also, again, to your point, I think I have been very passive in my approach; not sharing my purpose with my manager or with my HR or with my management, not being very clear to them, not being very specific to them like, “Hey, this is what I need. This is where I need their help on.” That could be one of the reason why I’m not getting a clear answer back from them because they may not be seeing a defined purpose.
MURIEL WILKINS: It could be, right? I mean, I wasn’t in a room with you when you asked for the feedback, but I would question, did you frame it as the reason why you’re asking for the feedback is because this is your longer term goal and you’re managing your career and you want to do it with clarity and you’re committed to the organization and you would like to see it come to fruition in this organization, therefore, you’re looking for, to the extent possible, some clarity around what are the two or three things that they think, not guarantee, but would position you for an opportunity if and when an opportunity came about?
SAM: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
SAM: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And here’s the thing, Sam, you have the skill to do it because you shared with me, this is what you do when you see an opportunity for the business. And I’m saying treat yourself like the business. Position yourself as to one where there’s a need and a goal, and what you’re trying to get clarity on is, how do we get from where you are in current state to the goal, okay? No different than a gap analysis that I know you’re an expert in doing from a finance standpoint.
SAM: I like what you just exactly said. Treat yourself like a business. I’ve been advocating of working a lot for my business, but am I doing the same thing for myself? And I think the way you just mentioned, I treat myself as just like my business, and I think I need to work more for me as well too, so that I can advocate myself and I can present myself that way, and I can go with a defined purpose and go with more clarity.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. And as a business, you can then make strategic choices. Again, I’m leveraging the fact that you’re in finance, so you know, one of the decisions is when do we stay and we grow and we cultivate it because it’s a cash cow, and when do we divest? Right?
SAM: No, I’m glad you’re using that financial jargon, so it’s easy for me to relate.
MURIEL WILKINS: I listened a little bit in finance class. All right. Okay. Now… here’s the thing, I think when you do that, whether you get the feedback and the clarity that you’re looking for or you don’t, either way, the next question will become, can you fulfill the potential that you see for yourself in the context that you’re in? Meaning, in the organization that you’re in, the business that you’re in. Sometimes, it’s in the industry that I’m in. And that’s a reality check.
SAM: So, if I’m understanding your question, Muriel, correctly, are you saying that if I don’t get the clear answer, or if I don’t get to where I want to go, but the purpose or where I want to go, can I fulfill that purpose somewhere else?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. That’s subsequent. If you can’t do it here, then I mean, then you know it has to be somewhere else. Yeah.
SAM: Can I do it somewhere else?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. But I think most people start with, Oh, can I do it somewhere else? What I’m suggesting to you because of the track record that you’ve had is have you asked yourself the question of, Is it possible to do here? And we can go back to the metaphor of a business. It’s just like if you were starting a new business within the company that you work in. There would be a question, “Should we actually start this business within this company, or do we need to spin off… because the conditions that are in place here are not the conditions that would support the success of this new business?” So, what I’m asking is, are the conditions that are in place at the organization in which you’re in now, the ones that are actually going to be the conditions that help you meet your goal?
SAM: Got it. So, then that reality check would mean is continually assess myself in terms of the skills being fit for that role, in terms of that development needs and all those type of things?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. And I think when you’re doing that, again, you’re taking the driver’s seat rather than waiting for the conditions to fall in place… magically. So, that’s the skill building development.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then there’s the other side that you said, which is “Do people see it?” That’s the part around you taking action to make sure that people see it. Are you visible? Are you sharing what you’ve done? Are you giving line of sight to the impact that you’re having? Are others able to see you in a way where you can demonstrate the abilities to operate at the level of your manager? Because you can do all the work, and if it’s not visible to anyone, then it’s like the tree that falls in the forest. If nobody’s around to hear it, did it really fall?
SAM: Got it. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s the everlasting existential question, right?
SAM: Yeah. No, absolutely. Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, if we look at those two sides, the, Okay, maybe I’m not getting some feedback from here, but maybe I can go get it. So, that’s one. “Let me do my own self-assessment.” And then also, Do others see it? What work do you feel, or what steps do you think you need to take on both sides of that equation?
SAM: One, I can go and talk to my peers, my colleagues, who have been working with my manager for a while and who have been working with me as well. So, I can go and ask them this question. And for example, “Just tell me one thing which you see in my manager, but you don’t see in me. And then you would believe, if I can work on that piece, that will really help me to get up there.” So, that way if I can do a quick interview/assessment, maybe few of my peers and colleagues, then that way, I’ll be getting more very realistic feedback from the people whom I have worked with, and they also know my manager, and they will be in the best place to tell me very specifically what needs to be done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, that’s on the, “Let me do my own assessment.” Right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then how about on the visibility piece? What do you think you could do there that you’re not doing right now?
SAM: Maybe just take some more high-profile problem statements, areas which business is going through with, raising my hand more enough, taking some more risk, taking those problems which other people don’t want to take up and solve the problems for the business, and then raising my hand and going and solving for it, that will help me create more visibility.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, one path, which you’re already it sounds like expert at doing is kind of raising your hand to do the work, right?
SAM: But I think the answer… I’m trying to kind of connect the two is to your point, I’m very good in raising my hand, but I raise my hand when I feel that yes, there is a problem which I can solve for that’s easily manageable. I think I’m not raising my hand when there is a bigger problem, and if I solve for it, it will help me create a big visibility.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SAM: Maybe to frame it another way is, I’m raising my hand within my comfort zone; meaning like, “What will it take to do this activity? Maybe a couple of hours. Do I have couple of hours in the week? Yes. Okay, let’s raise my hand.” However, if there is some activity which may take five or 10 hours to do it, and I don’t have that time because I’m in my comfort zone, I think I need to come out of my comfort zone and raise a hand to go and do that thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Because if you stay in your comfort zone, guess where people are going to see you? In your comfort zone.
SAM: In that comfort zone. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. If you want to be seen as an executive, you’ve got to go do some executive things. Okay? All right? I mean, a few people still get seen as executive, but for most of us… For me to have to be seen as a coach when I first started coaching, I had to go coach.
SAM: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: I couldn’t just sit and hope to be a coach, and then I couldn’t just tell people that I want to be a coach. I then had to actually go coach. And nobody gave it to me. I had to go create coaching opportunities so I could coach, and then people started seeing me as a coach. So, for you, there’s really a theme here. The theme is about creating the opportunities for you, creating the discussions that need to happen for you, creating the avenue to get the feedback for yourself rather than waiting for those things to happen. And I want to acknowledge… I don’t want to be dismissive. In an ideal world, yes, those things should be happening. It would be lovely. And I would love for all people to be in situations where they are getting very concrete feedback from their manager and HR that gives them very clear direction on what their career path is from going A to B. The reality of it is, it doesn’t always happen. And so what do we do in those situations? Do we just wait in the wallow of it not happening? Or do we say, “Okay, it’s not happening, and then what? What do I do now?” Right?
SAM: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s really about having a sense of driving your own career until somebody else, maybe it’s a new sponsor, maybe it’s new boss, maybe it’s whoever, comes along and says, “Oh, you know what? I’ll help you drive.” Okay? But when they take their hands off the wheel, you’ve got to keep your hand on the wheel. Not all hands off the wheel. I think right now what’s happened is all hands are off the wheel. So, the first step is for you to put your hands back on the wheel. Okay?
SAM: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: The other piece that we’ve talked a little bit about is, and this is one of the areas that I think is still going to be great for you… until you add some clarity to it, is if you do all these things, right?
SAM: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: You go seek the feedback, you go do executive things so that you could get visibility as a potential for executive, out of your comfort zone, and the promotion still doesn’t happen, part of having your hand on the wheel is also about knowing at what point do you stop driving? At what point do you get off the exit? At what point do you need to stop for a rest? At what point do you need to turn right or a left? At what point do you take a detour? Okay?
SAM: It makes sense. Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: At what point do you stop? There’s a point. What I’m getting at is, at what point – what is the limit that you give yourself that you say, “Okay, if it’s not this, then I move on to something else, or I move on to this next step”? Whatever that next step might be. It might be outside of the company, it might be within the company, it might be the next step is I need to have another conversation, but what are the types of milestones that you’re going to be looking for?
SAM: So, I would say is – and again, I’m going back and trying to connect the dots – is one, getting some more feedback, more clarity, what could be couple of things I could be doing, raising my hand enough, developing those two or three things as a milestone, deliver on those milestones, get the feedback, and then asking the same question again, “Do they now see me as being promotable?” And depending upon their answer, then that could be a point where I would say, “Okay, what do I need to do now?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And are you putting a timeframe around that for yourself?
SAM: Currently, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SAM: But yeah, I mean, in this framework, which I just laid out, then of course, I will be laying out some sort of timelines as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So currently, you don’t have a timeframe, but what you’re saying is you want to shift to having a timeframe?
SAM: Exactly. And one of the reasons, Muriel, why I think I may not have a timeline is because my business is small, and as I was saying earlier, a lot of opportunities have shrunk, business has shrunk, so that could be one reason why I don’t want to put a timeline because I don’t see it. Even though I may say one year, two years, three years, but what I would be doing in that one year, two year, or three year in order to start getting the answer, you know what I mean?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I think I know what you mean, but I think what I’m hearing is you don’t want to put a timeline that you don’t think might not be guaranteed; meaning, you don’t want to put a timeline without some clarity that that’s a timeline that’s actually going to happen.
SAM: Yeah, and I think exactly. I think for me, the million dollar thing is getting the clarity. For me, it’s the biggest thing. Today, if I can get the clarity that, “Hey, these are the two or three things you definitely need to hit before we further assess or to do something,” I will be the most happiest person in this world.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes, clearly.
SAM: I think not having that clarity and vague is also demotivating me as well as… not having me reassess, but having me asking a question on myself is, what am I not doing, or what am I doing wrong… to not get evaluated or not getting the clear answer?
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, I mean, in the void of an answer, you’re creating your own answer, which is, “I must be doing something wrong.”
SAM: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
SAM: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which we don’t know. We don’t know. I think you need to put some stakes in the ground. “I’m not getting clarity for others. I’m going to seek my clarity. I’m not getting a timeline for others. In lieu of that, I’m going to set myself a timeline. And yet, is there a risk that as a result of that, I may not hedge my bets correctly? Yeah, there’s a risk. So, then the decision becomes would I rather take that risk or the risk of what I’m in right now, which is nothing is happening and I’m feeling the way that I’m feeling?”
SAM: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s up to you. Okay? So, I think you’re in a position where, because nobody else is in the driver’s seat, you need to be in the driver’s seat rather than be in the back seat or on the passenger side. So, I’d love to hear from you… how do you feel now at the end of our conversation versus how you felt coming into our conversation, about your whole situation?
SAM: So, getting into the conversation, I was confused as to what I should be doing, but I think after that meeting, I think I’m more motivated, I would say.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re more motivated.
SAM: More motivated to present myself in a better way, to, again, using the same words, advocate myself better. I’m more positive that yes, if I go that way, then at least I have more probability of getting the answers than what I was earlier. So, I’m more positive and feeling more motivated now, I would say, more encouraged now.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, I want you to hold that feeling of motivated and positive as the attitude going into the next couple of weeks as you start putting this framework into action. Okay?
SAM: Got it. Got it. Muriel, thanks.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you. Thank you. Organizations do have a responsibility to develop their employees, and employees also have the responsibility to manage their careers. Even in sm’s case where the career path is ambiguous, it’s easy to feel as he did that your career advancement is at the mercy of others. And while stakeholders will definitely influence his progression, it was important for Sam to recognize he had more in his control than he gave himself credit for. With that newfound sense of ownership, he was able to take the wheel of his career and steer. I recently heard from Sam, and he had this to say, “I left our coaching session committed to advocate for myself for promotional opportunities and take the steering wheel of my career in my own hands. A few days ago, I stepped up and had a great conversation with my boss in HR around an excellent opportunity. Though it didn’t work out for some internal reasons, my thoughts and aspirations were very well received, and in the process, I was able to plant the seeds in their minds of what it is I’m aspiring for.” It’s so clear that Sam is well on his way to managing his career in spite of the lack of clarity around him. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
SPEAKER 3: I started my own management consulting business, hesitantly, I would say. I’m a corporate animal, for lack of a better word, so as I was embarking on this particular journey, I knew now more than ever, it’s going to be so critical that I manage myself, that I lead myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. You can also find me in my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you are listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Become an Intrapreneur?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Charles to protect his confidentiality. He’s been a project manager at a real estate development company for around five years after spending time in finance and in the public sector and after getting his MBA. Charles has started thinking about the ways he can develop his niche at the company and move forward in his career in part by focusing on a small but growing part of the business.
CHARLES: I really began to think of it as an intrapreneurial role. I started to really do some research around that and think of myself… Even though I don’t have a separate P&L for this business, I wanted to start thinking like that and start putting myself into that mindset. And part of what I’m navigating right now and in need of some further guidance on, is making that mental switch and also this sort of career adjustment that’s perhaps pushing the envelope a little bit relative to where I am in my career now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Charles is thinking about the ways that his personal goals can align with the goals of the company. Even when there isn’t a formal path to getting there, he’s thinking about how he can be more intrapreneurial.
CHARLES: I would like to really be running this business unit. I, for a long time and perhaps to some degree still, have kind of entrepreneurial ambitions and if the right opportunity presented itself for me to go out on my own, I certainly would strongly consider that. But I’ve also realized that there’s a path that could be equally for fulfilling where I do that within the context of a larger organization. But I know that to accomplish that I’m going to need to kind of create that role for myself. It doesn’t exist today, it’s not like there’s someone else in that job that I can eventually replace it. It’s a whole new job description, if you will, and so kind of crafting the job I want and then moving myself into it is kind of what I’m seeking to do in a way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Charles came to coaching looking to specifically figure out how to carve out this other path. Let’s dive into the conversation now as I ask him more about why he wants to take his career in this direction instead of staying on the track he’s on.
CHARLES: Absent any deliberate effort on my part, I could just follow that track and be here thirty years from today doing the same kind of job but in a different way. And I realized that that’s not what I want to do. I want more than that, I want to have a business development aspect to my job, I want to really have some ownership. I eventually want to have sort of people working under me that I can mentor and coach and grow into a real organization within the organization, if you will. So, in order to do that, I have to kind of create that role. You know, I was promoted a little while ago, but in this capacity I’m still viewed largely on paper and by certain folks in the organization as an execution person, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay.
CHARLES: Not as a business leader. It’s not an officer role like a vice president role would be. So, part of it is overcoming the mindset hurdle of others to see me as someone who’s already starting down this path of being a business leader within the company and not just a individual contributor execution person. So, that’s part of the obstacle is getting others to see me in that way and to embrace my vision for what my future looks like and how that could dovetail with what’s in the company’s best interest.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative). Okay. Understood. So, why don’t we start with that?
CHARLES: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: Because of the two questions that you surfaced are very much connected with each other. One is, what’s the mindset and habit that you need to shift to in order to be an effective intrapreneur? And the other is, how do you change the mindset and habitual way that people perceive you so that they view you as an intrapreneur? Right? So, we’re sort of like chicken and egg.
CHARLES: It is as a very much… just kind of hand in hand parallel path thing going on, and too much progress in one area starts to kind of run up against not enough progress in the other area.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
CHARLES: Well, if I really push on the changing my habits and I’m trying to shift kind of how I spend my time every day, I can only go so far with that before someone says, “Yeah, but your current job is X and you got to still do that.” So, to move them along that path, I have to get them to begin to see me as, “Oh, no, he should be spending his time on this business development stuff, for example, because that is part of the role he’s increasingly playing.” So, I kind of view these things as moving in lockstep. As I evolve, I need to make sure others are evolving as well in how they perceive me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I mean, in essence you’re straddling the two variables that I sometimes chat about, which is you’re straddling knocking out of the park your current performance in your day job while demonstrating your future potential in what you aspire to be. Right?
CHARLES: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And here’s the good and bad news. The good news is you have an opportunity to do that, right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like you have a field where you can play both. The bad news is you’ve got to play both for a while and you’ve got a parallel path on them. Like, it’s you almost want to think about them as two businesses; one that you are already solidified and you’re maintaining it, which is your current performance – the things that you are currently responsible for – while you have the side hustle, you know…
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: …this other business that you’re building, and you’re kind of in the stage of building the business case for it. Right? Not quite sure how people are going to respond. So, from the sense of one rubs up against the other, I guess I’m going to offer to you ­– how can you think about them as an “and” rather than “one versus the other.”
CHARLES: Yeah, that is a great point and I think it is what I have been doing as this has evolved. I want to be clear that my boss, for example, and some of the others in the region are supportive of kind of the direction I’m trying to take things, and I think they do see this pathway for me as being a legitimate and relevant kind of path for the company. So, I don’t want to make it sound like I’m pushing everybody uphill against their will. There’s definitely support there, but it is an “and.” It’s both doing the current job at an exceptional level and I’m increasingly working on, how do I do that more efficiently? Is there ways to delegate? Is their “fat to be trimmed” there that can make room for the side hustle to grow? That’s been and it is an ongoing effort. And then the side hustle – I realize I have to demonstrate value in that side hustle in order for it to be able to grow. Right? That only if I show the time that I’m spending on that is creating value, okay, well, then you can do more of that. And so, for a period of time, I’ve got to juggle both and do both and I have no illusions about that. I think I want to kind of begin with the end in mind here and think about in two or three years when I’m hopefully at the point of letting the side hustle take over, if you will, that I’ve done everything that I can and need to do to make sure that happens.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, no, absolutely. So, what you’re looking at is kind of a gradual shift in proportion in terms of the energy and focus and time that you spend on the day job versus the side hustle, right? So –
CHARLES: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: – you have a certain amount of time and energy to spend on anything and the question is where do you focus it?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if I’m hearing you, it sounds like you have the support internally, so that’s not the rub. But it sounds like the rub is in how you allocate yourself so that you can still do the current job effectively, but give attention to the growing business and be in an intrapreneur there so that by the time it’s full scale, there’s actually a business that you can run.
CHARLES: So, I think that is the area that I struggle with the most – because while I can intellectually acknowledge that what got me here won’t get you there, as my old boss used to say, it’s one thing to say that, it’s another thing to let go of the things that have made you successful and some, perhaps, a perfectionist in some ways. And let go of some of those things so that you can make that room.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what are the things that you feel like you need to let go of in your current role?
CHARLES: I would say more and more delegation is something that I need to continue to work on. My first inclination when there’s something to be done is to think, how am I going to get this done? How many extra hours is this going to take? And I probably should be at least in parallel, if not in the first place asking, does this need to be done, period? And then if so, who should do it? Like who’s the right person? Maybe I’m not the right person. The delegation piece and kind of letting go of the control kind of delegate both the task and the authority behind that, you know?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
CHARLES: And not kind of keeping my fingers in it to much…
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Right. Right.
CHARLES: … which is really hard sometimes. I think that’s definitely one of the things I need to work on. And then I think the other thing, which I sort of alluded to, I’ve never really developed a good dial for… quality is not the right word… but the effort dial. I either do things at a ten or I don’t do them, right? I don’t really have a one through nine, and that’s fine when you’re a student, that’s fine when you’re an individual contributor with kind of a manageable kind of load. But I think increasingly I’ve got to develop more shades of that effort in order to – because not every task deserves an A, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: It sure doesn’t.
CHARLES: And some tasks, a C effort is perfect. And guess what? You’re not going to get any credit for doing more than that. So, anything you do above a C is kind of wasted, and it’s hard to admit that as the person doing the work, but it’s kind of like this task doesn’t need more than that.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Charles, the answer lives within you, right? Like you literally just came up with your own for framework. I’m not even sure why I’m here coaching you. You’re coaching yourself! Because in essence, if the goal is to create more space so that you can then allocate that energy, that time, that focus to building the business, right?
CHARLES: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the question becomes, how do I create space? I think what you’ve articulated is really a two-step process. The first is delegating. So, shifting from
I do the work
to
who else can do the work if it needs to be done.
And then the second is if
I do the work
– meaning if Charles does the work –
what does doing the work look like?
Right?
CHARLES: Right, right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Does it always need to be full throttle on ten? Okay?
CHARLES: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: The question is, can you have the discipline to go through that process?
CHARLES: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
CHARLES: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And one of the things that you might want to consider is before you even start doing that for tasks that are going to come your way, that you can start by actually doing an inventory of what’s currently on your plate.
CHARLES: Hmm, interesting.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you were to post our conversation, look at your to-do list, or even do an inventory of over the past month, if you could roll the tape back and ask yourself those same questions; A, should I be the one doing it? Should it be done? A, should it be done?
CHARLES: Yeah, that’s the most brutal.
MURIEL WILKINS: B, should I be the one doing it ,right? Should it be done? You know, kind of going through those questions because what that will come up is, well, what do you need to know to actually answer those questions? So, when you think about should something be done, what do you base that on? How do you even make that decision?
CHARLES: I think the answer to that has and continues to evolve for me. In the past, I might have said, “well, it needs to be done because it’s pertinent to a project success or it’s something my superior is asking me to do, or it’s going to have a direct kind of impact on my performance review and perception.” Right? And all of those things probably are still valid, but perhaps are shrinking in their relative proportion to questions like is this going to move the needle on this business I’m creating? Is this going to drive revenue or an outcome that’s going to lead to revenue versus is this just moving pieces around the board and not really getting anywhere? Maybe there’s, like I said, some brutal honesty that needs to happen with myself to say, “This might feel good to be doing this and it feels like you’re making progress, but it’s not really moving the needle and maybe you need to let it go, because you enjoy doing it, maybe you like doing it in the past, but it’s no longer serving the broader objective.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s absolutely right. And here’s the thing – it’s very hard to make that distinction if you don’t have clarity around what the broader objective is. Right?
CHARLES: Yeah, mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: So, just because something has become in the it’s-something-nice-to-do category as you put, it doesn’t mean it’s moving the needle. But it used to move the needle, and so what’s the difference? The difference is in the goal. What is it moving the needle towards? Right? What is the destination? And so, I think a big piece of this and probably why you’re experiencing some tension here is that the uber objectives have changed, but your focus and your habits and your mindset, as you put it, have not completely shifted over. Right?
CHARLES: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And in a way they need to play in both sandboxes. So, when it comes to delegating and starting with that decision point of, is this something that needs to be done? The way to filter through that is make sure that you have clarity around what the overlying objectives are, and determine based on those objectives, does this fall in the path?
CHARLES: Right. The question I had was sort of… You know, as you’re trying to think through what that broader objective is, in some ways it feels like that broader objective is becoming less about me directly in a way in the sense of, I’m not doing this thing because there’s a direct line between completion of this task and my own sort of performance. The line has become kind of more squiggly and it’s sort of like this task, this thing, this subject is going to drive revenue and grow the business. I benefit from that growing business, therefore, this benefits me. It’s almost like introducing kind of another level or layer that I’m realizing I need to be thinking through kind of that lens versus the old lens of more of the individual contributor. You know, this is my little fiefdom, I just need to manage this to kind of more broadly thinking there’s a business to be grown here and it’s going to take time and there’s lots of steps involved and there’s going to be a winding path. Eventually it will all… The success that I have personally in my career is directly linked to that, it’s just maybe not as straight a line as it used to be in a way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, what you’re articulating is you’re scaling up because before, the goals were sort of a direct line to what you can impact as an individual, and now you’re seeing it as there’s a bigger goal, right? It’s at the business level, so you’re leveling up. It’s no different than being, for lack of a better metaphor, a bachelor and all you have to think about is yourself. Right?
CHARLES: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then all of a sudden you got the partner and the kids and it’s like, “Ooh, now I’ve got to think of the family.” Right?
CHARLES: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But a lot of people say, “Yeah, but don’t lose sight of yourself as well.” So, it’s an – and so, in this particular situation, you’re moving from bachelor to the family in terms of you’ve now got to think about something bigger than yourself while not losing sight of the things that are responsible for taking care of you, i.e. your current position.
CHARLES: Yeah. That’s a really interesting, I think, relevant way to think about it and perhaps resonates only because I do have a small child now and sort of learning to respect new constraints and limitations that I have, that are definitely uncomfortable, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
CHARLES: For someone who sort of didn’t always have to make those considerations, so it’s a really interesting kind of analogy to think about a kid – and you’ve got to nurture it and grow it and make room for it and have a vision for what it will become, nd it’s never going to stop growing and evolving so you have to keep up with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
CHARLES: But you also, I think, make a great point. You can’t lose sight of yourself and in this professional context, it’s the job at hand that is still what I do on paper.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which will also evolve.
CHARLES: Yeah. Right. Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. Charles has already spent a lot of time thinking about what to do next and, as I mentioned to him, he’s really coaching himself. But as he thought about the constraints that he faces, the example of what it can be like to have a new child really struck a chord with him that helped him see his situation in a new light. Just like having a newborn required him to change his considerations when he became a parent, he’ll need to shift how he manages himself as he moves to being more intrapreneurial. I wanted to dig a little bit deeper here to see how he approaches his current constraints and to ask him how he decides where to spend his time and energy. Let’s jump back in as he responds.
CHARLES: Usually my first step and my first thought is to try to just be more efficient like we were saying earlier, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
CHARLES: The ultimate answer, and the one that I’m coming to terms with, is being more selective about what you agree to do in the first place and being much more… just being really choosy, I guess, and really recognizing that you’ve got to say no to a lot more than you used to keep the things that really matter. And as you said earlier, that requires having clarity on what really matters and that’s a process in and of itself, I think. But efficiency is only going to take you so far I think, and then you have to say, “okay, prioritization and really trimming out the things that aren’t moving the needle” – whether as a parent or as a professional – “trimming those things out I think is ultimately what has to happen,” and that’s, I think, a lot of where the challenge is but where the opportunity lies also.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. Because as cliché as it sounds – I love it. I love this cliché – but when you say no to something, you’re saying yes to something else.
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the question is what are you saying yes to? And your disposition tends to be to start with, “Okay, how can I make this more efficient?” And then you’re saying, “But maybe I should be shifting to, ‘no, let me think about how I can be more selective and move into prioritization.’” That shift is a shift between being reactive to being proactive. When you’re saying, “Okay, what’s on my plate, how can I be more efficient?” It’s, “I’m reacting to what’s in front of me and trying to triage
.
” Right? Versus, “Oh, let me think about what is the highest and best use of my time for what this current job needs, as well as what that side hustle, that building business needs. Let me be very clear around what I have to offer, what it needs, and then find that intersection of what is the highest and best use of my energy and my focus and my time,” and use that as the filter for deciding where you put your time and energy and focus, at least 80% of it, right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s always going to be that 20% that –
CHARLES: Right, doing the laundry.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. You were reading my mind, Charles.
CHARLES: You still got to do the laundry.
MURIEL WILKINS: Doing the laundry. Still got to do it.
CHARLES: Nobody gets away with that one.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I try to delegate it, I don’t get very far. So, when you start thinking about it from that standpoint, the question of what is the highest and best use of – and this is a real estate term so I know you get it.
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
CHARLES: No, I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is the highest best use of Charles as it relates to these two areas that you are responsible for? How do you think about it?
CHARLES: Yeah, and as you were walking me through that, the thing that really came to my mind – and this relates to your previous comment about having clarity on the vision or the goal as being a necessary kind of prerequisite. I was reminded of when I was in my MBA program. I went to school, I was a little bit of an older student relative to my peers and I had a laser focus. I went there, I’m here to get an MBA in corporate finance and real estate. I have zero FOMO. I do not have a single FOMO bone in my body, and I’m just going to say no to virtually everything that doesn’t align with that objective of adding this real estate skillset and then getting a job in this field. I was pretty brutal, I mean, to the point where one might argue I took it too far and didn’t do enough kind of fun exploratory things. But I was really, really clear;”This is what I’m here to do, and I’m making this investment in myself. I’m not going to dillydally with other things that aren’t directly aligned with that.” I don’t know why I didn’t think of this until this conversation, but I can’t remember another time in my life when I’ve had that much clarity that was really then followed through with actual action and behavior change and really saying no to things that don’t align. And not being ashamed to do that – not feeling mixed feelings of about, “Oh, I’m letting this person down, or what are they going to think of me because I’m telling them ‘no’ about this?” I was unapologetic.
MURIEL WILKINS: Unapologetic, yeah.
CHARLES: And I need to take a page out of that book, I think, here. Really get that clarity on both the side hustle and the current role and then just be unapologetic about, “These are the things that I’m pursuing until somebody tells me otherwise,” that counts.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, and I think there at the core of it lies your definition of the mindset of an intrapreneur, right? It starts with… I mean, I don’t think you’ll find this in the MBA books of the unapologetic that you’ll see it termed as conviction and purpose and passion, but we’re going to call it unapologetic, okay?
CHARLES: Yeah. I’m with you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Laser focused. Right? So, my question to you is what will it take for you to get that level of clarity now in this current context?
CHARLES: So I think it is going to need to start with some reflection on what are those goals in both areas, because I think maybe they’ve kind of changed a little bit in recent times and I haven’t fully taken that on board. So, getting that clarity first because that conviction, that unapologetic nature, I think comes best when you have that clarity. Like, my propensity while someone asks me to help with X, Y, or Z is you want to please people, you want to be liked in the workplace, you want to be reliable and you want to be the person who always has a solution or, you know? That’s historically been my sort of self-defining feature, and not that I want to be a complete jerk, but there’s room in there to move in that direction of being a little bit more assertive, borderline prickly to just be clear on that. And then you’re like, “Let me point you in a different direction.” It’s not like just “no, go away” but it’s finding the right tools and words to redirect those incoming things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. So, in that, the reason why the clarity of goals grounded in the business is important for you… it’s because without that you won’t have a good reason to delegate or to say no and not be who you habitually have been which is to do everything, right? And my guess is that just saying no for the sake of saying no is not a good enough reason for you.
CHARLES: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: In essence it’s creating boundaries, putting a stake in the ground, so that you can create some boundaries and those boundaries lead 80% of the way. We don’t want it to have so much rigidity that you lose sight of things, but how you make sure that you maintain some flexibility is that you’ve revisited time to time. This question of highest and best use and clarity of goal is not a one and done. I’d say particularly now as you’re building this thing and you’re looking to shift your focus from one to the other, you should be revisiting it every couple of months.
CHARLES: Yeah, that’s a great point, and having that regularity is definitely not something I’ve been intentional about.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which segues nicely into the other question you had, which is, “how do I create – harness – the mindset of an intrapreneur?” So, when you think about what’s the mindset that you need to shift to, how do you define the mindset of an intrapreneur?
CHARLES: I certainly think a big part of it is what we were talking about earlier, having that clear focus, the conviction, the unapologetic nature of that. I think having a mindset that’s flexible and creative around how things get done… that sort of plays into the delegation a little bit, but I think it maybe is broader than that – of just having an outcomes-oriented mindset versus  an inputs-oriented mindset, right? Putting three hours or thirty hours into this is irrelevant. What’s relevant is does, the outcome match what’s needed? I guess proactive would be another key piece of it; to your earlier point. There’s a lot that comes at you every day and not all of it really deserves your attention or your effort, and you have to sort through that but you kind of need to do so more proactively rather than just being in the midst of the river kind of having the water push past you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. So, if you were to think about a theme to the mindset that you’ve had to date before you became an intrapreneur, what would be the theme or the title to that soundtrack?
CHARLES: Hmm. That’s a really good question. I mean the word that comes to mind first is kind of intensity. It would definitely be kind of a heavy metal soundtrack that’s just kind of constant and sort of not nuanced in any way. And there’s a there’s level of just pushing, pushing, pushing constantly, and maybe not having as much of a rudder, right? It’s all kind of forward thrust and not as much kind of guidance. And I feel like that’s been fine, that’s got me here, but I realize that what’s needed going forward is much more nuance and kind of guidance around, where do you focus that thrust?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would be the theme and soundtrack to your intrapreneur music?
CHARLES: I mean, I feel like it would be, like I said, equally intense. Intensity wasn’t really the distinguishing thing, but it’s almost like a really… I’m trying to think of like a very intense classical music piece like
Flight of the Valkyries
or something where it’s very – there’s a lot of precision and nuance and clarity built into every note, but it’s equally voluminous and kind of filling of the room, you know?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
CHARLES: Similarly, I’m not expecting or seeking for my professional life to be any less driven or hectic or demanding. To the contrary, I know it’s going to continue to be, but it’s about being demanding in the right areas in the right ways.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what I hear in commonality between the two themes is the activity part doesn’t go away, the execution part doesn’t go away.
CHARLES: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? But one which, is the former, as an individual contributor’s activity that falls within directive potentially, but there’s a lot of activity with a lot of intensity and it’s a lot of doing. And what I’m hearing in terms of an intrapreneur – in terms of what you’re saying – is, yeah, there’s a lot of activity but it’s aligned with certain outcomes or certain goals, which is really interesting because I heard… I don’t know who said this. You’ll have to excuse me, my memory is horrible when it comes to remembering names. But I heard somebody once describe or I read somebody describe intrapreneurs as “dreamers who do.” Dreamers who do. I love that because it basically synthesizes exactly what you said. It’s the “and.” It’s the “and” between the vision and the goal and the clarity of that goal and the execution – the things that need to make it happen, and that’s what an intrapreneur and an entrepreneur do. Right?
CHARLES: Right. Right. Yeah, a hundred percent, and I’m going to revise my previous statement about the soundtrack because I realize that was missing something. I think that the entrepreneurial soundtrack is probably more like John Coltrane. There’s a huge amount of technical proficiency that underlies it, but it’s very creative and free-flowing and entrepreneurial, everything that an entrepreneur or intrapreneur needs to be. And it has a melody and there’s a clear consistency to the music and it always resolves it itself where it is going, but the path there is totally improvised, right? And that’s kind of how I see that as coming sort of together in my mind. As a former saxophonist, I should have thought of that initially.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, my son is a saxophonist so…
CHARLES: There you go. That’s nice.
MURIEL WILKINS: … a current saxophonist. A thriving one, so I can totally relate.
CHARLES: Awesome.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I want you to carry that, right? I want to carry these soundtracks because that’s something that you can feel.
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you were talking about the heavy metal, I could feel it. Right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I could feel being in a heavy metal environment. I could feel it inside, I feel it in even the way you were describing it, and I could feel a shift in the way you presented yourself and your energy when you talked about it being more of a John Coltrane soundtrack, and that’s something you feel. So, I want you to use this element of soundtrack just as a signal for you as to when you’re operating more in one mindset versus the other.
CHARLES: Yeah. That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And using that as the flag of, “what shift do I need to make, whether it’s one to the other?” Because right now you’re straddling.
CHARLES: Right. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’ll give you a sense of when you need to shift gears.
CHARLES: A hundred percent. No, I feel like that literally changing the soundtrack, because I do listen to a lot of heavier music in the car these days… that’s more been my mode of operating and I was sitting here thinking when was the last time I listened to John Coltrane or any of the other Charlie Parker or the saxophonists that I used to really enjoy listening to when I was playing actively. It’s been a long time, but that resonates very, very strongly. And I think you’re right, the question is like, okay, how do I decide which CD to put in the changer? Right? Is today a heavy metal day or is today more of a jazz day and figuring that out and navigating that. You said something earlier in the conversation that I think I do want to kind of come back to here around the discipline. Following the discipline, rehabituating to this notion of, okay, when something new comes down the pike, the algorithm I’m going to put it through has to change. The steps that I’m taking as I’m thinking through what to do with this thing has to be different. And we’re representing that in this music here, it’s not just – it used to be throw it on the pile and keep plugging and full blast, right? Full volume. And now it’s more of, okay, I need to work it in a more nuanced way. There’s a few notes in my solo that I’m going to add as a result of this, but I’m not changing the whole structure of the song and maybe I’m not even incorporating it at all. Maybe it’s just something that needs to pass me by,
MURIEL WILKINS: By now, Charles has a very clear idea of the steps he needs to take to get on the path he wants – to steadily shift from always doing everything in the mode of an individual contributor to learning to decide what is most vital for him to spend his time on. I wanted to work through some real examples with him to make sure he didn’t just get it conceptually, but could actually apply it after our coaching meeting,
CHARLES: Thinking of a very sort of tangible nuts and bolts example of this, in the past, when I’ve received outreach from other vendors or contractors or architects who reach out to me and say, “Hey, I’ve heard about this new project you’ve got and whatever, we’d love to come talk to you about what we do.” They’re trying to generate new business on their end, and historically more on often than not, I was engaging in those conversations or at least entertaining them and maybe giving people a half an hour of my time, mainly to grow my network and to grow my exposure. More recently, I have started to put, for lack of a better word, a script together of a very nice way of saying, “I can’t do that and here’s why.” And importantly – and this is really the critical little nuance – not leaving the door open and in a very professional, nice way. I need to kind of move that incoming aside, right? That’s kind of an obvious example and a low hanging fruit that I’ve already self-identified. It definitely feels like it’s something that’s going to just require a lot of practice and intentional effort. That’s kind of why I like the idea you said earlier about start by looking backward, things that have already happened and do an inventory. Like, “yes, you’ve already done this thing or it’s already entered your to-do list, but how did you do?” It’s like, score yourself from the past and where could or should I have done differently. That, to me, feels like that would be an easier way to kind of get in the water because when you’re just dealing with the stuff coming at you in the midst of the day, you’re in that sort of live fire environment. It’s really hard to add new frameworks to that, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
CHARLES: You’re just trying to stay – and I’m totally mixing my metaphors here – you’re just trying to stay afloat right and not get swept away. That’s a really difficult time to be introducing new untested things. At least for me, I would not trust myself to step out and, I’m going to try this new thing and it’s unproven and so it could totally blow up in my face and I could lose time and it could be… It feels very risky to do that when it’s in the midst of everything.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think what you’re basically saying is clean out your closet before you go shopping, right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Meaning it’s the same framework. You know, do I need it? Should I wear it? Do I give it away? Do I throw it away? But let’s look at your closet first and clean that up, and it’s practice for overlaying those decisions that you need to make. And then the next step is then you go shopping you say, “Okay, I see everything in store, how do I make a decision around what I pick based on this framework that I have?” So, by looking at what you’ve done over the past couple of weeks, it is practice. It’s the mental practice of running through those questions –  how do you make those decisions, recognizing that you might identify opportunities right there on the spot that creates some space for you moving forward. One of the areas that I encourage people to start is even just look – I don’t know how you do your calendar, but let’s assume it’s Outlook – it’s even just to look at the meetings that you’ve had for the past four weeks. Do a retrospective just on meetings alone.
CHARLES: Yep. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: And putting those disciplined questions to those meetings, and then in hindsight saying, “Huh, which ones did I really, we need to be at?” Right?
CHARLES: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
MURIEL WILKINS: Which ones could I have delegated? Which ones did we even need to have?
CHARLES: That is excellent, and I think what that could also do for me is create a built-in progress tracking mechanism in the sense of, if I look back at February and do that analysis and categorize everything, did I need to do this? If no, it goes in that bucket and break it down as you’re describing. And then when I look back at March, did I improve? Right? Did I do better at eliminating? Are there fewer things on the calendar that shouldn’t have been there? Are there things that were delegated? And give me an opportunity to kind of provide that guidance to myself over time so that over the next couple of months, I’m hopefully making real meaningful progress on that transition.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that your habits currently are very steeped in action orientation. And the shift, the mindset shift that you’re making in order to accomplish your intrapreneur goals and to mind the role that you’re in now, is to think, decide, and then act. So, it’s the “think” and “decide” that need to be integrated into your process. All right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, from that standpoint, you said that there’s a couple of habits that you think now you’re going to put in play. What would those habits be? What are the ones that you think – just as a summary – that you think you’re going to be focused on?
CHARLES: I think the first one – the macro one that comes to mind is just introducing a pause, getting more comfortable with pausing. As someone who’s very action-oriented and kind of “go, go, go” all the time, introducing the pause, I would say, is the first step, and then what do I fill that pause with? Adjusting the framework from just being how is this going to get done to does it need to be done? Who should do it? And then if it does, what’s the appropriate amount of effort that should go into this? I think the third habit that comes to mind is regularly reevaluating the goals. Every few months kind of stepping back up to that macro level and saying, “Okay, are the overlaying objectives and goals and vision that I’ve set that through which I’m filtering all of these things on a day-to-day basis… have those shifted at all?” All of those fit under this notion of introducing the pause, whether it’s a pause before saying yes, whether it’s a once a quarter pausing to think about the vision. That’s kind of, to me, like the macro-mantra of the conversation is kind of introduce a pause.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know, when we entered the conversation, we talked about straddling both your current job and the side hustle, and that notion hasn’t gone away. Right?
CHARLES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like you still need to the straddle. I think it’s how you do it.
CHARLES: Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. It’s a needing to do it and doing it effectively, and I think we’ve talked about a lot of good strategies for how to do that, so thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Terrific. No, thank you. Thank you. Best of luck. When Charles came into the coaching conversation, he had an idea of where he wanted to be career-wise, but not a clear sense of how to get there. In putting some of the strategies we discussed in place, Charles will be creating a bridge between the career vision he has and the execution to make that vision a reality. By creating alignment between his actions and his goals, he has a much better chance of attaining the career he desires. And by doing so, he can now consider himself among those who are not just dreamers and not just doers, but rather they are the dreamers who do. That’s it for this episode. Next time on
Coaching Real Leaders.
SPEAKER 3: It’s kind of that aha – like, this is my capability, this is my capacity, this is a product of how I was raised. It is not my team’s and nor should I expect them to meet the standard I set for myself, which means I need to hold them accountable sooner and it’s uncomfortable for me, because I’m in a people role, there’s a piece about being liked.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’d like to dive deeper into these coaching sessions, join me and the rest of the Coaching Real Leaders Community for live episode discussions at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. And if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge of your own, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. You can also find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter
@MurielMWilkins
or on Instagram @CoachMurielWilkins. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: How Do I Transition from a Corporate Leadership Role to Entrepreneurship?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Jane to protect her confidentiality. For the last 10 years or so, she’s worked in a corporate environment managing across different lines of business and regions. She and her team were revenue drivers and she had a reputation for turning around ailing parts of the business.
JANE: While I certainly have a lot of pride in the revenue and the results that I delivered, I have a ton of pride around the impact that I had as a leader on people. So, I had to balance my time between understanding the scenario of the business and start to create a really quick short-term strategy, but also be focused on the people side because as we very well know, if you don’t have the people portion correct, you’re certainly not going to have the productivity there that you need in order to deliver on the business objectives.
MURIEL WILKINS: That role created the foundation for where she is now in her career. She recently launched her own consulting practice, taking the formula she used internally to now help her clients grow their businesses. But the transition from corporate to entrepreneurship is new for Jane.
JANE: And I started my own management consulting business, hesitantly, I would say. I’m a corporate animal, for lack of a better word, and I truly love being in the corporate environment. I knew now more than ever, it’s going to be so critical that I manage myself, that I lead myself, and learn how to not shelve some of those what I feel are my superpowers really is the leadership piece. I’ve completely shifted gears in certain ways, and I’m worried that I’m not delivering on a value that I have to bring to them, and I just want to make sure that I’m leading myself to true success.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jane is now building her own business, which can be a pretty daunting shift for a lot of people. She’s looking for ways to build influence and be a leader outside of the structured environment she previously succeeded in. So, I started by digging in a little deeper to that success she had in her prior career to really define what she sees as the environment she thrives in. I asked her, what did success mean to her previously?
JANE: Certainly there were financial objectives and there were annual operating budgets that we had to hit. My team and I always devised a strategy ensuring that we could go back to the executives and even though we hit our objective, ensuring that we acted on all of the various strategies and tactics that we had mapped out that was very important, especially for my teams who oftentimes I found even in large, massive, like multi-billion dollar Corporate America organizations, oftentimes they’re not fully driven by the strategies, but the people piece was exceptionally important. Empowering people on my team from the youngest members, the most junior members I should say, so that they could start to earn and gain a very informal leadership experience before they even had anyone reporting to them. Peer-to-peer counsel and support networks were important to me. And then the development of each and every single individual on the team to ensure that they felt that we as an organization, we were investing in them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so it sounds to me like success when you were internal in the corporate world was being able to meet the business objectives while at the same time developing and leading people.
JANE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so it gives me, I don’t know. I have this picture in my mind of what that land looks like, right?
JANE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Almost like a feel for probably what the energy of working in your organization was like. So what is the mindset that you think you had back then that enabled the actualization of the success that you had envisioned for your organization in terms of being able to drive for results while at the same time developing people? What’s the mindset that you had as a leader?
JANE: Well, there’s a mindset and there was also a runway. Just as I’m speaking to you about it, the questions are popping up, what is different? Why aren’t you doing those things? First and foremost, I would say from a business results point of view, I had an infrastructure of the organization where we had annual objectives and long-term objectives that we were trying to hit. It might be launch a new product line, for example, and so then I could take that larger corporate strategy and then start to define what our accountability would be in driving that. What’s absent in the new client based environment is some of them are operating in the absence of that strategy, and some of them are very entrepreneurial driven. They’ve had much success leading their organization without a strategy that it’ll take some time to help them exercise that muscle, to understand that at this stage of the life cycle of their organization, in order for them, because they might have been seeing stagnant growth, in order for them to catapult themselves to the next level, it’s going to require planning, and that’s universal. Then I had mentioned the runway in the corporate world, although we oftentimes mostly feel like we have the shortest runway ever, that runway feels that much shorter when you are working with a client with a very finite period of time to prove results before they make a decision to say yay or nay, we should move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, on the one hand, what’s different for you now? One is there is no overarching structure or architecture or framework that is driving the work that you have to deliver on.
JANE: Correct. And if there is one that exists, because some clients are different from others, it’s a very loose, it’s not a formalized plan. It’s very loosely there and probably has some holes in it and needs some updating, needs some validation in terms of data, et cetera.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then there’s also this, how much time you have to get them to move. So you’ve now identified what’s different. So, how does that make you feel? What’s the difference in terms of the impact that it has on you versus the way that you felt in corporate not having that overarching framework and having a shorter runway?
JANE: Well, first and foremost, I’m definitely hitting the ground running in an influencer role versus a pure leader role. Because I’m an asset to the executive leadership team, I’m asked to help them possibly rethink their organization, but I’m not being brought in on day one with direct reports and that leadership responsibility. So, right out of the gates coming in, I feel as though I do spend… And I do this with any new role that I have. So, this isn’t necessarily different. I have to spend and invest a good amount of time to build trust within the teams that I’m working with. So, there’s a lot of listening and a lot of learning and observation. So, that’s not different. But the difference being is that through their lens of I’m a consultant is a little bit different from this person is my manager. I certainly feel as though how I delicately try to influence different people within the client’s organization, those individuals are not expecting a leader. Now I have over time with some of the individuals because I feel as though I roll up my sleeves and I do whatever is required to further while, whether it’s developing the relationships or mostly to get the job done.
MURIEL WILKINS: It feels to me as you’re talking like something is lacking and I’m trying to understand what is it that’s lacking for you?
JANE: Yeah, that’s a great question. It’s probably the leadership piece.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
JANE: Having a direct responsibility and an accountability to impact the growth and development of other individuals. I think in a very formalized way, that’s not to say, and I as I was just mentioning, I do this in the informal way, it looks different. So it’s probably still really very much there, but it’s not formalized. So maybe the client won’t necessarily be aware of that impact that I’m having.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
JANE: It’s hard to measure that, and that’s not something necessarily that those individuals are going to report back to the executives to say, well, this is the impact that I’ve had. And then I don’t necessarily think there’s anything missing. I think it’s the mindset. There’s a mindset maybe shift that needs to happen, and maybe this just naturally happens over time the more you are out of corporate environment and you are in a consultant role that you become less focused on the I’ve got to prove myself, I’ve got to prove myself. But truth be told, I think I was like that in the corporate environment as well, because every year was a chance to be promoted. Every year was a chance to smash another goal. So, maybe that’s part of leading myself is reminding myself that it’s all the same thing, it’s just disguised differently. And the other thing that I definitely had to really have some stern talks with myself about was it’s not the number of hours. Certainly there’s an expectation if you have clients that expect you to deliver the equivalent of 20 hours of work in a week, even if you’re on a retainer base, you’re fairly cognizant of that in terms of how you delineate your time. But it’s the results that you achieve versus the number of hours that you’re billing for. And I had to remind myself of that oftentimes throughout the last X number of months that I could bill out 20 plus hours. But if I achieve nothing in those 20 plus hours, that billing process won’t last very long with that particular client.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, exactly. So, I think it’s really interesting because my sense is you’re grasping for what are the measures of success that a year from now, two years from now, whatever X timeframe you want to use, you can look back on and say, okay, I’ve done well, I’ve succeeded.
JANE: That is 100% me, 100%. Because even at the end of the week I’m trying to create that list to send it out to the client, but I think it’s almost more so for myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Right, exactly. And you’ve had that when you’re on the corporate side, it was very concrete. They hand it to you. They say, Hey, it’s January, here’s what you’ve got to do by December. And now it’s like nobody’s telling you what you have to do. Nobody’s telling you what the measure of success is. You have to define it, and it might be ambiguous for a little bit until you have some repetition to realize, oh, this is how I can measure success for my clients. So ,my sense is right now, because you place such a high value on leadership and you’re missing that in your role as a management consultant in the way that you’ve had it before, it makes you feel like, What’s going on? Am I succeeding? And I think one of the things that I would offer you is when you talk about leadership, I remember somebody said to me once, or I may have heard it, I can’t recall, but they were like, “there’s being a parent and then there’s parenting, and the two are very different. You can be a parent and not be great at parenting, and you can parent as a verb without necessarily having the title of being a parent.”
JANE: Very true.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think what you have shifted from when you were in corporate, you had the title of being a leader positionally, and you were also able to lead. So, you did both. You were like the holy grail. You were a leader who actually led. Now, when you’re internal to your clients, you don’t have the positional title. And I think that’s what you’re feeling the miss of, right?
JANE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: They don’t see you as the leader. And so I think you need to sit with that. And I’ll ask you in a sec, how does that land with you that they don’t see you that way? But that doesn’t absolve you from the verb of leading. When I say that to you internally at your clients, they may not necessarily be seeing you as the leader, they’re seeing you as the management consultant. How does that land with you?
JANE: Well, yeah, it’s reality, that’s the current reality. And as we’re talking through this, just this morning, I identified to one of the executives, there’s an individual on the team that has these types of development needs. So, not necessarily in this exact moment part of maybe the accountabilities that I was signed up for, but definitely, I’ve been wanting to say something, wanting to highlight something, and I did do that and it was well received. And I’m almost wondering, as you talk about the whole differentiating the title versus the action verb, maybe I just have to carve out those moments as they organically come to light, and maybe in this scenario it’s a little more cushioned around what we’re trying to achieve in this partnership, the productivity, this might be in the way or the resources because the math and asked to comment on the required resources of the organization. Is there a better organizational design for a certain department? And maybe identifying where it’s not a matter of sweeping out certain individuals because they’re not performing, but it’s going a bit deeper. Were they ever performing? And just using some of those leadership muscles that I would have been flexing before, but trying to keep it again in an organic way. And when I think about that need, there’s almost like a fear that five years from now I’m called back to the corporate world. Does that get rusty or is it just I just have to dust it off a little and it’s still there? Because I, for the last 13 years, made a strong commitment that on a weekly basis I was doing something to elevate myself as a leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I don’t know if it gets rusty.
JANE: Muriel, you’re supposed to say no.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because that’s what you want to hear, right?
JANE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: JANE is up against what a lot of entrepreneurs run into when they can no longer rely on clear cut corporate deliverables and metrics. She’s thoughtful and wants to do a good job, but is searching for how to define that and what it means in a different context from her previous career. She can jump right into the tactical with her clients and see what needs to be adjusted in their business, but she’s struggling in finding good leadership goals for herself in her own entrepreneurial venture. I’m curious about whether or not she’s ready to let go of the structure and familiarity of the corporate environment. Let’s jump back in as I bring this up to her.
JANE: Yeah, great question. I certainly have my ambition, even though I’ve veered in a different direction in this current moment. My ambition is C-suite. And C-suite I feel the most important skillset is that leadership piece.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
JANE: Setting culture, empowering people, that all equates to high-level of productivity. I mean, there are other things in that equation, for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I don’t want to read into it. So correct me if I’m completely off here. Am I correct in saying that you, having started your own business and become management consulting is not necessarily the end all? Meaning I’m going to start my business, this is it, right? As far as you know it really is a stepping stone or a bit of a detour and expansion, but still at some point you’d like to be back in the corporate path on your way to the C-suite? Correct?
JANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, that makes a difference. That makes a difference because I think in the same way that you mentioned, how do I leverage the skills and the knowledge that I gained when I was on the corporate side, how do I leverage that in terms of serving and seeing my clients? I think you have to think really intentionally about how do you use this experience in starting your own consulting business so that you’re learning some things and you’ll have some skills and knowledge that you’ll be able to leverage that prepares you for going back into the corporate side at some point.
JANE: Yes, that’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think some of the discomfort you’ve been feeling is, I’ve started my own business, I’m working with clients, and it’s like, where’s the end? You’re making this motion where I’m going in circles, but where’s the end? And is this really it?
JANE: Very much so yeah, those thoughts have definitely been popping up for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Okay. So, it’s good to know that this is in context of this other goal that you have, because then that changes how you approach it. All right? And this piece around, is it going to go rusty? And I said, I don’t know, because it depends, it depends what you do with it.
JANE: Sure. Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: I remember when I left my corporate job, corporate and I had been in strategy consulting and I moved into coaching and I hung up my shingle and it was just me at that point. But I remember always saying, you know what? Worse comes to worse, I can always go back to being a strategy consultant or go back to corporate because I know how to do this, this, and this. And then I remember a couple years in, maybe it was on year five or six, I woke up in the middle of the night and I woke my husband up and he was like, what is going on? And I was like, I don’t think I can go back. And he said, what? Go back where? I said, my fallback plan. Remember I could just go back to this. I don’t think I can go. And he was like, what are you talking about? I said, I don’t think I can work a spreadsheet the way I used to. Because I had let it go rusty. But the reason I let it go rusty is that even though that was my little fallback plan, it was a fallback plan out of fear. I didn’t really want to go back. So, I let it go. But if I really wanted to go back, maybe I should have taken actions there. So, what I’m going to ask you is, if your end goal, your uber goal is to be in the C-suite in a corporate environment, what are the skills and muscles… I’m going to put them in two categories. What are the skills and muscles that you want to maintain and retain and keep fresh that you already have? And what are the ones that you want to grow while you’re having this experience in having your own business and working with clients?
JANE: The second one, I don’t readily have an answer for. The first one, so what’s already in my existing wheelhouse?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
JANE: The strategy component, the ability to come into a business, identify very quickly how it’s been working, what’s led to the current success or lack of thereof? What’s impeding growth? And what are some of the tactics that can be employed for some quick wins? Well, first off, I always say, I’ve always said this to my team, no one really, truly will follow or jumps on board if you don’t have a plan. It’s like I’m showing up to a house build and I don’t have the blueprints for the house, and I’m the architect. So, I’m always rapidly starting to devise that blueprint. But a couple of quick wins really gets people on your side and having the ability to confidently make bold decisions to chart a new course, it’s really hard when an organization or a division has been doing something for 10, 20 years, but to boldly say, We’re going to go in this direction and I believe these are the results it will achieve. And I feel that that’s a requisite in a C-suite role. And of course it’s a template. It can be applied to any business, any division of a company, et cetera, et cetera. And then achieving those results 100%. What do I need to develop? When I left the corporate world, I was in a fabulous organization. I’ve been in very big organizations that are very recognizable. I was very proud of that. I was very proud that they believed in me and they developed me, and I was able to excel, but I was pigeonholed. So, even when I tried to make a leap to the other side of the business, I was always kindly redirected. S,o learning other functional parts of the business I feel is really important. But also making a name for my myself and expanding my own brand to bust out of being known for X, this functional expertise, and that it’d always be my name, would be a little more synonymous with this type of function.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s a couple of things that I’m hearing from you, all right? When you talked about the things that you can keep, right? Because I see this as what do you need to keep? What do you need to pick up? And what do you need to let go of? And I think they’ll let go of part is probably what’s going to be a little trick again, but we’ll get there. But the stuff around what do you need to keep, and they’re all related. What do you need to keep? The strategy piece, being able to drive to results, being able to lead people towards results and support the agenda of the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: You want to be able to keep all of that. What I heard as an undertone is a sense of ownership, a sense of owning how we drive to the results. A sense of owning how you develop the people to get to the results. A sense of owning how you frame the vision and the strategy in order to meet the overall corporate strategy. And to what extent do you feel you have any ownership when it comes to the work that you’re doing for your clients in the way that you did on the corporate side?
JANE: Well, I definitely feel as though I’ve shifted to player more so than coach because I’ve had to. I’ve had to be able to say, “this is something that I have contributed in the last X number of months, and those have been quite tactical.” I mean, I have written strategy, but I feel that’s a communal document. I took information and data and input from various sources of the organization. And for me, in that particular instance, it matters more to me that it’s a communal paper versus this is mine. Because then I feel as though I’m trying to take something that I’ve authored and enforce it on people as opposed to it was a community collaborative effort. Let me ask, when you ask that question, is it because you feel that it’s important to me to be able to say I can put my stamp on that? Is that why you’re asking the question?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I don’t know why I’m asking the question. I just ask the question. I wasn’t going anywhere with it. It’s just something that I missed. And so I’m going to ask you that do you feel a need? And without judgment. The clients aren’t in the room here, right? No judgment. Does it do something for you? Does it give you more of a sense of confidence or value if you feel like you can point to something and say, “that was me?” There’s a direct line back to what Jane did.
JANE: Yes, and I don’t like admitting that because for the last 15 years, that’s exactly the opposite of what I was trying to do. I felt like I was being the opposite of the leader that I wanted to be if I had to take ownership of something, it was the team or individual on the team. But in this case, because it is self-preservation, and it’s also, as I mentioned, I started off the clients on a pilot program, at the outset, that was to give myself leverage so that when the six months were up or the two months were up, it was time to negotiate because a few of these organizations, they had never really worked with a consultant in my capacity, for example. And so I wanted them to feel comfortable with the retainer based model. And I knew that I would have a better ability to negotiate after showing some quick wins. So, yes, I had to say, boom, I delivered on that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And I think what’s key here is the way that you tee that up by saying, “I hate to admit that because that’s what I’ve been trying not to be in my past role, yet, here I am. And here I am having a need to be able to demonstrate what I’m bringing to the table, not only to my clients, but also to myself, because I came into this a little hesitantly,” as you said.
JANE: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, when we hesitate, it means there’s always a little something that’s saying, did I do the right thing? And so I don’t know, yes, you have something you need to prove to your clients, right? And it sounds like there’s something you’re trying to prove to yourself. So, what is it that you’re trying to prove to yourself?
JANE: I think what keeps me up at night is I know that I’m a fairly decent price tag for these organizations, and it’s very important for me that I deliver value on that. That there’s a real ROI and not a 1.5 times ROI, a 10 times ROI. But there’s also… yeah, I don’t want to break my winning streak. I felt like it’s really important that I’m always tracking the wins. There’s a great story around that. When someone asked me in the last five years, what have you done? I like to be able to pull up the, well, we achieved this, we achieved that. I have data points at the ready. I think that’s the way I’ve been brought up, is to always set a goal, and in almost every aspect of my life, set that goal, smash it, and set another one, an even bigger one. And that’s also how I also led my teams was we’re going to the Super Bowl and we win a title, and then what’s next? We want to win two Super Bowls. We want to go here. I feel motivated by that. And I like to look at my trophy cabinet probably, I mean, this is revealing my deepest secrets, but I do. If I was an athlete, I’d want to have a gold medal, I want to have won the Olympics, a world title. And it’s not about being the best of the best, it’s about setting that goal and then smashing it. It’s just ringing the bell when you close the deal. It feels so good and it feels so good when you’re in a team and you do that together. Those are some really emotional moments. And when you leave that leadership role and you’re an independent consultant, you have to be your own cheerleader, but you’re so used to doing it for the entire team, and then there are times when I have to tell myself, “I’ve got to get excited. I’ve got to get excited in these four walls here, and be the one to be like, ‘today we’re going to achieve this.’ I’m going to bring the bell.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly, right? Oh my gosh, you are looking to ring the bell, but you’re using your old moments as the moments to ring the bell versus what does it take to ring the bell now?
JANE: That’s right. That’s right. Yeah. What does it take? And okay, there will be the we landed a client, that’s great. I have to set more of the micro moments so that there are smaller milestones to get excited about. And I think there’s doing that for myself and on my own, and then certainly doing that with the clients as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And I love the way that you framed that because we’ve been focusing our conversation, or you’ve focused a lot of your conversation around the client impact. And JANE, what I would say to you is you’re actually walking a parallel path. You’re wearing two hats. You’re a consultant, and we have to define still what does that mean? What’s the value in that? You can rename it to something else if consultant doesn’t feel right to you. There’s the work you’re doing inside the client, and that’s one piece of it. And the other path you’re walking is you own a business. So, you are a CEO.
JANE: True.
MURIEL WILKINS: You might be the CEO of one in a company building of one room, but you are a CEO. And I haven’t heard anything from you around what juices you up there.
JANE: Yeah, because I think as soon as I started with my first two clients, there were conversations around, well, how do we make this a full-time role? Almost like, how do we bring you on as an employee? And my part of the brain that craves security was like, yes, yes, yes, yes. And I had people offering to help me on the business side, Okay, we’re going to help you set up a website, you need a proper domain name for your email address. And I’ve been delaying and delaying that. And I don’t know what that means, but I think, like I said, that part of the brain that’s craving that just likes to be in the secure place. And I like to try to live by the philosophy that the greatest things can happen in the unknown when you’re in that seat of the unknown, that’s when you can dream up the most unbelievable realities, the things that you can make come true.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me just say something here. Okay? Because this notion of security.
JANE: Yeah?
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m glad you’re thinking about it that way because I think when people get to a place of, Should I start my own business or should I stay in my corporate gig? Which again, I can empathize, I was there. I remember over 20 years ago, do I keep the comfortable corner office or do I go to my walk-in closet and start working there? Truthfully. And a big piece of it was security, but I’m just going to plant a little seed about this word security. Security is all relative and it’s an illusion. Okay? I don’t know if you’ve ever experienced being in a corporate job and that security blanket being pulled out from under you. Either your boss changes, you lose your job, your people get laid off, big work change, et cetera. Or you’ve seen others go through it.
JANE: I have twice. So, you’d think that I wouldn’t know that is not as secure place.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, anything is as secure as you want it to be. Security is a feeling. It’s how you experience it. So, the person who’s the die-hard entrepreneurial, I-will-never-work-for, quote, unquote, “the big corporate, blah, blah,” their sense of security is not working there. And the person who’s like, I will never go start my own business, their sense of security is working in the corporate. So it’s all relative.
JANE: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s no judgment on whether, as you said, when you said that the best… I can’t remember the exact quote, but the greatest path is where the unknown is. Well, there’s unknown everywhere. And what you’re experiencing now is just another field to get comfortable with the unknown. But I think at the end of the day, you also have to ask yourself, what can I do to make myself feel secure in the chapter that I’m in right now?
JANE: Yeah. And I actually think that part of it is I almost feel like I need to shake everything off in this moment and shed some of the, I’m going back to corporate tomorrow because I really don’t think that’s where I’m supposed to be. Otherwise, why would I be doing this? Why didn’t I just spend X number of months and then look for a different job?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, it’s not what you’re supposed to be doing. How about, what is it that you want? What do you want to be doing?
JANE: It’s crazy, but the word successful is going to come up. I want to be successful. I mean, we can define that in a million different ways. I need to lead myself through this, and I’m not leading myself through it. I’m being in it. I need to lead myself to get the most out of this situation that I can.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what does that look like? What does that look like to get the most out of this situation? How will you look back a year or two years, three years from now and say, I got the most out of this situation?
JANE: I have to stop living in this in between. I think there’s a part of me, and I’m not going to blame it on the client, but having planted the seed of, Well, maybe I need to accept that I’m doing it. I set out to start this management consulting business, there are people who are rallying around me and supportive, and I’ve had great clients that I’ve been able to set up. I owe it to them to fully be invested in the now, in what it is that I’m doing without being one foot in, one foot out. And then it’s just like I would for any other individual on my team, and doing what we’re doing right now is what’s my objective? What’s my objective for the next two years? What do I need to achieve not with the client? And whether it’s path A that leads me back one day to a C-suite. What does that look like? How do I lead myself through growth? Because I certainly led myself when I was in corporate, nobody told me to take leadership courses at Harvard. Nobody told me that I should be reading leadership books on a weekly basis. Nobody told me to put all these different things into play. So ,I know that I can lead myself, but I’m just not doing it. And then how do I ensure that I am growing outside of the growing that I’m doing with these individual clients? I’m not doing that.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you have dove so deep into the client and doing the work, actually doing the work.
JANE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That you’ve lost sight of the fact that you’ve started a business.
JANE: 100%.
MURIEL WILKINS: In losing sight of the fact that she’s also now a business owner, Jane is straddling. Her commitment depends on how she feels versus putting a stake in the ground and saying, “I’m all in even if it’s just for the next 12 months.” She hasn’t considered what it looks like if she doesn’t have an out, if she does plan to eventually go back to corporate. So, the mindset shift she is seeking is actually about moving to one of commitment. And here’s the thing, commitment doesn’t just appear magically, it’s a choice. It’s a decision. And that’s why it’s uncomfortable for her, because it’s a choice she has to make. She doesn’t have to be an entrepreneur. She can go right back to corporate if she wanted to. So, what’s becoming clear is that there’s nothing truly anchoring Jane in her new venture. My sense is that she lacks a north star with her own business. So, I asked her, how will she know that her business has been successful a few years from now? Has she laid out the strategy for her own business in the same way she does for others?
JANE: Yeah. The answer is no.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re shaking your head. The answer is no.
JANE: That’s surprising to me. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would that do for you if you just went through even the exercise?
JANE: It would be the blueprint. And I think that would allow me to commit to this because there’s a plan. But you’re so right. I’ve been so diving, I dug deep for it and I keep digging deep for the client, which is great. But I don’t want to be in a situation where I haven’t planned, There are no contingencies. Just like when I was in my corporate role, things will change. How do we plan for those contingencies?
MURIEL WILKINS: And I can understand why you dove right into the client because it gave you a hit. It gave you a hit of being able to point at the end of the day and say, I got a PowerPoint deck for the client. I’ve got it done.
JANE: Exactly right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I had two meetings with the client and they went well, I got it done. It gave you that hit of I’ve done something.
JANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is, as you know, because you’re a student of leadership, leading is not just about doing, leading is also about being. And in being, what you haven’t been able to do so far yet is pull your head up and say, okay, where am I going with this? What does that look like? I mean, I don’t don’t know, you tell me. Have you set up sales objectives for you as you’re a business, how many clients you want by X period of time, how much revenue you want to generate by X period of time? Have you done all of that?
JANE: No. I set one revenue target.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
JANE: Yeah. And what’s funny is, before I landed the clients, I was mapping out the process: Here’s what I need to do, I need a corporate sizzle to explain what type of services I’m going to offer, Im going to make four of them, I’m going to do a photo shoot, I’m going to work on my own branding. I had mapped that out. And you know what’s funny is this is exactly what I used to tell my team not to do. It’s the equivalent of having your head stuck in the email inbox. You’re just like what’s happening in the moment? What’s happening in the moment? And that is not a recipe for success. This has not been pulled together the way I would’ve expected myself to pull together my own business. And I actually don’t even call it my own business when I’m speaking to people.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you call it?
JANE: I have clients.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And I think that’s a big differentiator. You talked about, I think earlier in the conversation, sometimes it feels like you’re an employee.
JANE: Yes. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re not an employee, you’re the owner.
JANE: I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: And there’s a difference between having an ownership mindset and having an employee mindset. And so you’re operating with an employee mindset, waiting for direction from the owner. And guess who’s the owner? You’re looking at her in the mirror.
JANE: Oh gosh, and it’s so true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think it’s time for you to put your owner hat on.
JANE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s interesting to me, when you look at people who start your own business, sometimes they veer way to… They swing the pendulum on the other side than you. They’re like, I’m the owner and they do no work. And then they have no clients. They have a great revenue target, beautiful website, wonderful photo shoot, all the things. And it’s like, yeah, but how many clients do you have?
JANE: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Zilch, zero. And then there are those who you know better to start off with some clients and then play catch up on the, actually let me build this business, right? Because it’s an actual business that’s a little bit more sustainable to do, but it takes some intentionality to lift your head up outside of, as you said, the email and the client meetings and the deliverables to say, “Oh shoot. I’m actually running a business, I know how to run a business, I’ve done it before. It’s just been inside a corporate machine. How do I do it now here?”
JANE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think in order to do that, the biggest thing, Jane, is it’s not because you should be doing that, it’s not because you expect that’s what you should do, it’s because it’s what you want to do. Okay? Running your own business is not for everybody, nor should it be. Only do it because it’s what you want to do. It’s like going on vacation. Don’t go to x, y, z destination if that’s not where you want to go. Don’t go to the beach if what you really want to do is go skiing, you can still have a vacation. Choose the vacation you want. And in this case, you can be a leader wherever the heck you want, but choose what container you want it to be in. Is it in the form of having your own business or is it in the corporate setting? I think that’s what you need to decide, even if there are time limits to it. And it’s okay to say, I want to do it in my own business setting, at least for three years. Or it’s okay to say, you know what? I’ve done this for a little bit now, I actually think I want to go back a little quicker to the corporate setting and continue to do my leadership thing there. Totally your choice, but you have to decide.
JANE: That’s the problem. I think I’m not convinced that I have made that decision. I do think I need to give it a little bit more time. We grow the most when we’re uncomfortable. And if you’d asked me in the last few years of corporate, I would’ve said, the only growth that I’m getting is I’m forcing myself to explore something that’s not even accountability. So here I am, I’m learning, I’m learning about all these different businesses, I’m learning about aspects of the business that before I didn’t have a role to play, I saw it from arm’s length. And so I think if I can just commit to it and say to myself, if tomorrow I wake up and I decide this isn’t for me and I’m not happy or excited because I’m the type person, I’m excited to go to work, then you can decide then. But at least you gave this a good old college try. How can you know if you love something or you don’t love something until you’ve really put your heart into it?
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. I feel like we can settle in. So tell me what… We’ve covered a lot, believe it or not.
JANE: I know. My gosh. We have.
MURIEL WILKINS: Tell me what your takeaways are.
JANE: Oh, there’s a lot there. There’s a lot there. I went backwards and we together went backwards, looked at what motivated me, what was empowering me then, and I think it’s important to go back to understand, Is that what’s going to make me feel empowered now in my current reality? I just have to say the emotional piece of leadership that kept coming up in the back of my mind is always talking. I think that’s the love affairs that I have with working is that piece. And having to admit it, that I’m not typically that person. I’m either white or black, I’m in or I’m out. I make decisions quickly and I’m steadfast about them. So, being in this gray zone of it’s hard for me to admit to that, but it doesn’t mean that it’s a fail. And so maybe I have to say that I’m proud myself to admit it. And so thank you for getting me there. And reshaping the win, that’s a big one for me. It really is. And I think putting in that effort, that’s going to be a challenge for me for sure, because I have to pump the breaks over here for a second on the client needs in order to take the time and invest in myself and this business that I’ve started that has a very nice revenue stream and understanding how I can scale this, what does that look like? And applying the same principles that I had in my old role, and to expand on that in establishing a business. So, yeah, we unpacked a lot. We definitely did. I feel like I just ran a pretty long race because you have to explore things and you have to be honest with yourself, and you have to admit what’s scary and is that why you’re coming in high? Or is it legitimately, you prefer something else? I think I need to, after this session, say to myself, I’m investing in myself. I’m investing in my business. And put your money where your mouth is because you’ve been talking – or, I’ve been talking  – about my brand is turning businesses around, starting things up and making them profitable and achieving those results. And I need to have that same story as it pertains to my own business.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Exactly. So, act like the CEO of your business.
JANE: That’s it. That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I can’t wait to hear how this goes for you.
JANE: Oh yeah, yeah. I’m excited. I’m excited. We’ll need to do a check in for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, we sure will. Well, listen, thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you for doing this with us.
JANE: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: At the end of the conversation, Jane admitted that she felt that she had just run a bit of a race. Being in a state of ambivalence can definitely feel exhausting. But once you can be honest with yourself about what choices you need to make and what you’re ready to commit to, you can truly start moving forward toward your goals. On a personal note, I lived this scenario moving from a corporate executive role to becoming an entrepreneur and experience all the risks that come along with it. As a coach, though, I can empathize with Jane. But it’s important that I not confuse my client’s story with my own. And that’s why it was important for Jane to define what security means for her and not look to anyone else, including me, to do that for her. We create our own security, and it means different things for different people. Jane had to come to terms with that and choose what trade-offs she’s willing to make to achieve her goals. Only then will she get the most out of her entrepreneurial journey, however long it will last. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders.
Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I’ve been able to show great value in areas that are not conventional or traditional in big law firms, and even in government service which I’ve had great experience with. I’m very good at building relationships and the law firms that I was at realized that there was economic value to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you are listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: How Do I Hold My Team Accountable?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that, hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months but, on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Maggie to protect her confidentiality. She works in HR at a large tech company, but she’s also had leadership roles in the past.
MAGGIE: I realized I’m kind of heading towards the apex of my career, and it’s at that point now where I wanted to go to a big company because I wanted to play in the strategic place. I think my ego enjoyed being the head of a small company, but I didn’t enjoy the work. It was very operational. Being in a large company gives me that space to be truly strategic and be able to do some long-range plannings and work with leaders and impact large groups.
MURIEL WILKINS: She now leads HR support for a client group that helps solve tech issues within the company. It’s a group that has to be responsive and strategic, which means she also needs to be both of those things.
MAGGIE: I’m responsible for where the organization is going, so I would say the future. What’s our three to five-year plan, which is always kind of squishy in a tech role that moves very fast, and where we are today? So, what is the organization going to look like? Where are we going to be located? What kind of talent do we need? Can we hire that talent? Do we need to develop that talent? Should we go acquire something? So, that’s the kind of questions I’m working with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Maggie really likes that kind of strategic leadership role and is aiming to fulfill that role while balancing the nuances working within a large company, which means that she has a lot to do when it comes to managing her team, helping them prioritize short-term reactions with long-term competitive plays. I wanted to get a better sense of how she’s interacting with her team. A quick note, we referenced the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator throughout this episode. It’s a common personality style assessment, and we’ll link to more info about it in the show notes in case you’d find it helpful to have more details. Now let’s jump into the session as I ask Maggie what she thinks her colleagues value in her work.
MAGGIE: I’m good at painting a vision. So, the analogy I would say is, for example, I can see the mountain and I can see the path up. I paint the picture of this is what it would look like when you’re at the top of the mountain. I give them a lot of autonomy, and I care very much about their wellbeing. I’m a good thought partner for them. I actually help spark ideas, help them unblock stuff, and that stuff they really appreciate about it. I would say the other side of the coin is that even though I can show, “hey, this is what the path of the mountain looks like,” I’m not great at saying, “Okay, let’s look at what we’re going to do in stage one, and who’s going to do what.” That’s the piece that I think is frustrating them right now is like, “Okay, well, who owns phase one and who owns phase two? Who’s going to take care of the food, and who’s going to take care of the water?” That’s the piece where I kind of say, “Oh, just figure it out,” because my brain is I’m already at the top of the mountain. So, that’s the piece I’m working on is the prioritization piece. Sometimes I have a hard time explaining to others.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m curious. Have you ever done Myers-Briggs?
MAGGIE: Yes. ENFP, but I’m borderline T and J. I can visit J when I need to.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you need to, okay. Yeah. I was going to say you sound like an N, Highly intuitive, sees pattern, sees visions, but then it’s the S’s are saying, “Bring it down to the ground,” right?
MAGGIE: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: What does this actually mean in terms of what we need to do, right?
MAGGIE: Absolutely. I work with engineers, so I would say I’ve modified my style quite a bit because I have to. The N and the F tend to be very much intuitive. I’ve learned to pause and say, “Okay, where’s a problem statement in that?” If there’s a problem statement, what is it we want to do with it?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m curious, what are you picking up in your spidey sense that’s going on with you? So why are we even talking?
MAGGIE: So, here’s what I would say is… I’ve been rewarded in my career for heroics. I’ve been rewarded for really doing breakthrough work, which is where I love to be. I have not been as successful in my career with the operational work. When I have had those challenges, I’ve usually found a partner who can translate this intuitive sense into something much more concrete, like a spreadsheet, a plan, so forth. I think one of the challenges I have right now is we’re growing so fast. I have limited resources. I don’t have that partner and I’m missing some headcount here. So, I’m going to do what I always do. I’m going to rise to the occasion, and I will be a hero. I will just do what needs to get done. But that means my wellbeing is not going to be in a great place longer term because I’m working weekends and so forth. My team’s like, “How do I help you? You’re exhausted. Where do we jump in?” I’m going so fast that I sometimes just need to step away for a week to just slow down and get back to a place where I’m not running so fast that I can actually start to say, “Oh, I could use help here. Or can I push back here?” So, I know that I can get into this… I call it just running on the treadmill and I don’t quite know how to stop the thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: So with that, as you said, you’re good at asking the question or in a problem statement or a problem question. What’s the “problem” that you’re looking to solve? What’s the question you’re looking to answer?
MAGGIE: I want to engage my team more. I think if I could take the time to plan and delegate and hold people accountable, that’s the piece … I need to stop doing it all myself and bring this talented team along for the ride and actually let go. It’s funny. I’ve always been one who gives trust, yet my actions tell my team, I think, that I don’t trust them because I’m not giving them anything. If I gave them something, a plan, then I think I can hold them accountable and set clearer expectations. So, it’s more like there’s some reason why I am just assuming they know what I want. I think part of it is I never was really trained to do it. Because I like this on the forefront space, I think I’ve always figured it out on my own. I’ve never really learned to put a plan together or hold people accountable in a way that’s repeatable and scalable.
MURIEL WILKINS: Could you share an example that illustrates for me just to bring some color to it for me? I’d love to understand how this impacts you on a day-to-day in terms of your ability or that demonstrates you not engaging your team in the way that you think you should.
MAGGIE: Well, there is a program manager who has templates and comms. She sends me the email, and it gets buried in my email. And then someone says, “Hey, where’s your plan?” I’m like, “Oh, where is my plan?” So I go to my team and say, “Hey, we need to get this done.” I don’t pick up the tools and say, “Hey, let’s sit down and go through this.” It’s like I expect them to do it the way I do it, which is, I will figure it out on the fly. As a result, my team’s like … I’m learning. They sat down. I asked for feedback, and they told me, “You tell us to get something done, and we do it eight different ways or 10 different ways. We’re exhausted. That’s not the way to this. And then we find out afterwards that there was one way to do it and we’re backing into it. That was just a waste of our time.” That’s where the frustration is.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you find as a result of them not having the plan? What happens afterwards?
MAGGIE: They’re tired and I’m losing … I mean it’s more the longer term. It’s the longer term. Their wellbeing is low. I care about them. I’m encouraging them to take time off, but they’re like, “We actually just need mindshare. We need time management, and your management is not helping with that. We’re getting tired, and you’re losing credibility.” So, the upward feedback is definitely, “You need to fix this because, if not, I’m probably going to self-select out.” I literally just had that conversation with the team this week. They’re like, “You’re not good at this. Let somebody else do it.” I’m like, “Okay.” It means I have to let go of being … Maybe there’s a responsibility or an accountability piece where it’s like I have to let it go and I have to let them fail.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are you letting go of?
MAGGIE: I think the deliverable. I have to let the team deliver it rather than me rally the team and be the point who’s collecting all the data and delivering it. It’s more like, no, I think they can put it together and they can deliver to the program manager. I don’t need to be the middle of this to show that I’m a leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what keeps you from stepping out of the middle?
MAGGIE: Habit. I think I don’t know what’s on the … What do I do if that’s not my role? So, I think it’s that classic problem of I’m going to take a bunch of stuff off my plate and the plate looks kind of empty. I don’t know what to put on it. So that’s where I have to figure out. What I’d like to figure out is different food to put on my plate because that’s not working anymore.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So that’s really interesting because you’re moving from, just to use the example you just gave around what’s on your plate, and then you take it off. Then it becomes what do you want on your plate or what do you have to have on your plate? How you make that decision of what’s on your plate depends on what? Let’s just run with this a little bit. What does it depend on?
MAGGIE: A lot of it is resources. But I think I’m my own worst enemy with what goes on my plate. I mean, A) it’s like there are a lot of strategic programs that I could put on my plate instead. I think part of it is I’ve just never really let go of this and let my team run – number one. Number two is I don’t think I’ve set clear expectations with them about what ownership means. So, I feel like I’m like, “Okay, you can have the plate. No, you can’t. You can have the plate. No, you can’t.” I’m not really letting go of it. I coach people not to do this and I’m doing it myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s okay. Look, I have a coach. Okay? The coaches need to be coached, by the way. I mean, look, here’s the deal. I want to go back to the plate thing and the food example that you gave because it sort of takes it away from the murkiness of what you’re dealing with. Literally, how do you decide what to put on your plate to eat?
MAGGIE: Last year, what I did is I said, “Okay. Everybody, tell me what you’re doing and I’ll do a roll-up.” We ended up with this huge list rather than me saying, “Hey, the priorities are org design, talent, and diversity this year, period.” So, I realize I actually have control over my plate, when before I always felt like I left it open for anyone to put anything on it. It was like, “Anyone else want to add something on it?” No wonder I had a heaping pile of food.
MURIEL WILKINS: For whatever reason, I can’t let go of this plate. Maybe I’m hungry. I don’t know. But you decide what to put on your plate, depending on what it is that you need. Am I putting food on the plate to nourish my body? Am I trying to be healthy? Am I just satiating my hunger? Do I have a craving for a particular taste and so that’s what I decide to put on my plate? The issue is when it’s mindless, which is what a lot of people do and gets us into a ton of trouble. But that mindlessness can also translate in the workplace. The mindlessness is everything falls on your plate or nothing falls on your plate or you have no idea what it is. So of course, you refuse to let go of the things that really shouldn’t be on your plate. Okay?
MAGGIE: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think if you’re not letting go of certain activities to your team because you’re not quite sure what you would be doing in lieu of that, then the question becomes, what should you be doing? It can’t just be a boil the ocean exercise. It’s what helps you determine what you should be focused on. Is that determined by the business, what the business is doing? Is it, as you just said, here are the three priorities that we’re focused on from a human capital standpoint? I aligned it with the client and, therefore, that’s what I need to focus on? So there’s a framework around determining where you add value and where you add value to the organization, to the client, to your team that creates a perimeter around where you should be focused.
MAGGIE: Absolutely. I think that’s the key point right there. The other piece I’ve done is I’ve also shipped this up to my boss to say, “Hey, you gave us these. Here’s what my personal objectives are. Anything you have concerns about?” Because again, in terms of resourcing, is there anything else coming down that I should be aware of? But otherwise, this is what I’m going to deliver. I literally just did it this week. I think it was I was motivated by the pain I heard in my team’s voices. I was motivated by that disappointment in me as a leader that something so simple as, “Just tell us what we’re supposed to be doing and we need guardrails as well because we’re just piling everything on our plate because you’re leading by example.” I’m like, “My goodness.” That mirror was a little rough. It was a little rough. So, it was like, “Oh, okay.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Regardless of the details of her role in particular and what stakeholders she’s trying to manage, Maggie is facing a problem that many leaders face. There’s a piece around delegating and figuring out what she needs to do and what she should pass on. But there’s also another piece and what I think is really key here: accountability. She needs to set the priorities for her team and make those really clear. To get there, she needs to start by thinking about what activities or contributions are unique to her role to avoid being redundant with the rest of her team. Let’s jump back in as she and I walk through that process.
MAGGIE: We’ve had sort of a bottoms-up approach. I think it’s just historically the way the company’s done goal-setting, and now it’s top down. I think that’s part of the culture shift… is not only I need to relearn how to do this and take responsibility. It’s easy to do bottoms up because in a way, as a leader, there’s less accountability. “Well, this is how we all thought it would be.” Now it’s like, no, I’m saying this is what I’m responsible for and I will be held accountable for, which is … We’re going to go back to food. I’m only going to eat 2,000 calories. I’m going to be limited there. There’s scarcity. When in actuality, it’s like, oh, thank goodness. Okay. Now I know where I’m supposed to be. How do I feel that in the right way?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. With prioritization, what you’re doing is putting a stake in the ground. You’re saying, “This is what it is.” So, going back to I asked you what your Myers-Briggs type is. I’m actually not one that typically goes off of personality style-type things but, for this one, I think it’s actually very helpful. From a Myers-Briggs type, you said you borderline the P and the J, which the J is very strong at drawing conclusions and putting a stake in the ground. The P’s or that style of P is, no, let’s leave it open-ended, because the more open-ended it is, the more we can ideate and create ideas and sure that we don’t lose sight of anything. So it’s a balance between the two. The balance is a start with openness. At some point, you’ve got to close. You’ve got to decide. You’ve got to decide what are we doing? That’s really the process of prioritization. Okay?
MAGGIE: That’s really helpful. That completely resonated with me because I’m like, yeah, I kind of have a shiny penny problem. “Ooh, we could do this. Ooh, we could do this.” The team’s saying, “Will you just close because I’ve got to go get some stuff done? I want to be clear on what I’m being rated on because we all want to make sure we’re achieving and growing.” I’ve spent so much time in that P, and that’s what my natural style is. J is where I know I need to be more of as a leader. It’s like, yeah, that stake in the ground. That’s my aha moment for right now. It’s like, oh, I think I understand what the problem is.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. When we first started off, you said, “Look, I’m trying to shift from being this doer.” Where, really, it’s the doer of everything. It’s not just the doer.
MAGGIE: It’s so true.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s the doer of everything to leading my group.
MAGGIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it does start with, what’s the end game? What’s the goal? Let’s pick them. We can’t do everything. How do we pick what they are? It sounds like, from you, there’s two guardrails. There’s the guardrail of what the business needs to deliver on. And then the other guardrail is resources. So based on those two variables, let’s narrow down what’s the best of both worlds and then make a commitment of what we’re going to deliver on. So that’s one. The next step is how do you communicate that with clarity to your team? Because it’s not enough to just say, “Here are the priorities, go. Here are the priorities, go. Go at it.”
MAGGIE: Totally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What’s the roadmap and the clarity that you’re providing them so that they can actually execute and act on those priorities?
MAGGIE: I mean there is a format at our company around goal-setting. So, it’s like I can say, for example, talent. Talent reviews, we have to make sure we have … Leadership bench might be an example. Well, what does that actually look like? I think the deliverables in the past were like, “Hey, we just need to make sure we do talent reviews.” That’s not helpful. So I think that was the other aha. What’s the actual deliverables that we’re going to have by the end of the year? Is it, “okay, we’re going to do two sessions? This is what it’s going to look like.” Tell people exactly what we’re going to do rather than somewhere during the year you have to deliver this. Does that make sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
MAGGIE: So, I think it’s going back to that J side, if we’re using that language of that specificity, which just pains me to do. That’s where that partnership comes in with someone who can help me articulate it. But I realize that’s where I’m like, “This is painful for me, but it’s needed.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s the thing. You talk about how painful it is. There’s a difference between something being painful and we don’t want to do it, versus something that we really just can’t do.
MAGGIE: Right. I would say I don’t like to do it, not that I’m not capable of doing it. It’s just I need to just go there and spend time there. And then even when I go there and I spend time there and it’s clear, it’s a plan. And then I tend to not pick it up again. So, I’m aware that, okay, once we get the detail, how does that translate into then holding the team accountable for that? Do I bring this into my one-on-ones? Do I do a leadership? That’s more like I’m actually not sure what to do at that point to bring it in. I could ask them, but I think at this point … So I think that’s why it’s like, again, I create this beautiful thing and we’re all excited about it. And then it sits on a shelf.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, got it. Right. It sits on a shelf and it collects dust, right?
MAGGIE: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is really a matter of follow through. You could have the world’s most beautiful plan, but if there’s no follow through on it, it’s just a beautiful plan. It’s nothing else. Okay?
MAGGIE: Yeah. I know. It’s intuitive, but it’s amazing how it sits on that shelf.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Exactly. I’m breaking it apart because I think what we’re cobbling together is your role. Your role is, as we stated before, setting the priorities. We’ve just established second part of your role is creating the master plan. You affirmed that it’s not a matter of you not being able to create a master plan. It’s that you just don’t like it. Quite frankly, I don’t like driving my kids to school every day, but it’s part of the role.
MAGGIE: Just got to do it. Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the third is the follow through on the plan, which is driving and holding accountability. So what does that look like for you right now? You said you do the plan, and you don’t follow through. What happens?
MAGGIE: This is where I had a bunch of meetings to do it, but it was pulling the plan back out and using it. It was more ad hoc, if that made sense. So I had a team meeting to do strategic work, and yet it ended up evolving into the urgent. I think that’s what happened was. It’s about – discipline is really what it’s about. It’s getting my team used to, “okay, we have a leadership meeting every week. The first week of the month, we actually review these or every other week or…” So, it’s something that I have to actually put into a regular process where we pull it out and we look at it. It’s uncomfortable for a while. But after a while, we get used to the idea that no one’s embarrassed. It’s safe. It’s creating that psychological safety around saying, “I didn’t get it done. I’m running behind. I don’t know what I’m doing. I haven’t even started.” I think I haven’t really done that with my team as much as I could.
MURIEL WILKINS: I noticed, as you were describing that, you shifted to how your team may react or what might be uncomfortable for your team around that, around the notion of being held accountable if they have to admit that they haven’t gotten somewhere or that they don’t understand something. I just want to double click and check on that. Is that their discomfort or is it your discomfort at the potential of them being uncomfortable?
MAGGIE: It’s my discomfort. This is where my heroics come in. I will work until I get it done. It’s kind of that aha of, this is my capability. This is my capacity. This is a product of how I was raised. It is not my team’s and nor should I expect them to meet the standard I set for myself, but, at the same time, which means I need to hold them accountable sooner. It’s uncomfortable for me because I’m in a people role. There’s a piece about being liked. There’s a difference, I think, between the classic of being liked and being respected. Being respected is saying, “We agree to this. You’re not on track. What’s going on? How do I help?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what do you gain by not holding them accountable to the plan?
MAGGIE: I think it’s my way of saying, “You’re autonomous.” That’s my way of stepping out of their business. I think that’s making sure I’m not micromanaging. I probably am confusing the two when I’m saying it aloud right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Confusing which two?
MAGGIE: Micromanaging and autonomy with accountability. I think it is something I’m known for in terms of great autonomy, but with autonomy comes accountability and I’ve never really added that second layer.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. They’re not mutually exclusive from each other.
MAGGIE: No, I always held accountability as more micromanagement, but then I become a micromanager when someone hasn’t delivered something.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Because then you’re reacting to your biggest fear.
MAGGIE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: In a sense, you end up being the thing that you don’t want to be. By you set out saying, “I don’t want to be a micromanager,” and then you end up being a micromanager because the person didn’t do what you wanted them to do because they thought they were doing it okay.
MAGGIE: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Part of this is even if you just want to really mitigate having to become a micromanager, what systems do you put in place to help that happen? You talked about, “I don’t know, should I put the plan in front of them a week?” I mean there’s so many various ways you can do that. You could have a team dashboard that you revisit weekly or monthly. You could have a spreadsheet. The tool in and of itself – there’s so many different tools you can use. It’s more how you use the tool and how the tool serves you. You don’t want to be a slave to the tool.
MAGGIE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: You just pick a tool and try it. Worst case scenario, it doesn’t work, you change the tool. The spreadsheet didn’t work, you change it to the dashboard. That’s not what really matters. The value is in the discussion and the dialogue and the conversation that happens around the tool. The value of holding people accountable or having an accountability process is not just for the sake of holding people accountable. It’s because it creates an anchor so that you can determine what still needs to be done that flows back to those priorities that were set. Or where are the risks so that you can make decisions, so that you can allocate resources, so that you can coach your people? All those things that I just listed, making decisions, allocate resources, coaching your people, what do they sound like you’re being, if you’re doing those things?
MAGGIE: A leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Exactly. We’ll pause here because there are some insights that are really sinking in at this point for Maggie around how she can really translate her bigger idea or strategy into the nitty-gritty management of people without having to micromanage. She’s discovered that she’s been ignoring the accountability piece for her team and has to change the way she’s setting priorities. The conversation we’ve been having here, it’s also the conversation she needs to have with herself and her team. How do they set priorities? What are the criteria? How do they make sure that what they set out to do is actually what’s happening? It’s on Maggie to set up this kind of structure. I mean, look, here’s the thing. As the leader, you have to operate with your team in a way that they have clarity on two things. The first is where they’re going, and the second is how they’re going to get there. How they’re going to get there is both in terms of how they do their work to meet the goal, and the second layer of how we’re going to get there is how does the team work with each other to support meeting those priorities? It sounds to me like there’s somewhat of a gap in all three of those questions.
MAGGIE: Yes. I would say so it’s been very ad hoc. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s the thing though. I’m curious because we got to a place at a tactical level around what you need to do. I’m curious what got in the way of you getting to this level of specificity in what you could provide to your team?
MAGGIE: Part of it was our own processes within my function. We had people plans and they had 36 different goals, and those would come to us. And then on top of it, we’d have other stuff added to our plate. So it’s like I have learned how to survive in this very well-intended plans, but we weren’t held accountable for them. So, the modeling I’ve been getting within my own org is react to whatever the business is giving you rather than drive strategy. If you’re going to drive strategy, you’re going to drive a project. That was kind of, I think, the environment I’ve grown up with. I’m a bit of a product of my environment and you throw my style on top of it. That’s kind of how we ended up here.
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand you were reacting to the environment. What kept you from then turning around to your team and saying, “In spite of what I’m receiving from my environment, what I’m going to model to you is something different?”
MAGGIE: Nothing, except for me. They’ve been asking for this. I’m not sure I could hear it. I think this really gets into I don’t know how to do it in a way that makes sense to them, and that’s really it. Yeah. So it’s me being open about the fact that I have a skill gap. I just kept pushing it down the pike and I’ll fix it later.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, here’s the thing, Maggie. I want you to notice the pattern. The reason I want you to notice the pattern is because this is not the last time that your environment will feel like the wild, wild West, and you’ve got to do –
MAGGIE: It’s always going to feel like … Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: … something different for your team. So number one is you don’t have to model to your team what is being modeled to you.
MAGGIE: Okay. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the second is recognizing what your reaction tends to be when you don’t feel confident around how something should be done or don’t feel like you have the competency –
MAGGIE: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: … to deliver on something, as you said –
MAGGIE: I’m going to put it in the shelf. I’m going to ignore for a while. Yeah, I-
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s called avoidance. Here’s the thing what happens with avoidance, it actually almost never goes away…
MAGGIE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: … the problem that needs to be solved.
MAGGIE: No, it actually kind of grows feelers.
MURIEL WILKINS: It grows and festers. It’s like the mold behind the wall, right?
MAGGIE: It is. It is. You know it’s there and it’s lurking. It’s like, “okay.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And then it rains and you smell a little bit, you’re like, “Hmm, what’s that musty smell?” But then it’s sunny outside like, “Oh, I don’t smell it anymore. I don’t have to deal with it.” Right?
MAGGIE: Exactly. 100%.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t want to look behind the wall because I don’t know how much it’s spread. Okay. So avoidance – it’ll serve you in the short term. It gives you that hit of everything’s okay. I can keep on going, but it’s not sustainable. But what’s important here is for you to recognize when does that kick in for you? It sounds like it kicks in when exactly what you just said, which is, “I don’t know how to do this.” Let’s play this out. Fast forward. When you get that signal that you don’t know how to do this, whatever this is at that time, what options do you have for how to move forward, besides avoiding?
MAGGIE: I can certainly ask peers what they do. I can ask my boss what they do. Part of the avoidance is it needs to be okay for me to say, “I don’t know,” or, “This is new to me.” It’s like I’m supposed to be the expert at this. I think there’s a part of me that thrives in being the most knowledgeable. It’s that vulnerability which I think people want to see from me, which is, “This is new for me. This is a new space. I’m not as familiar with this. Does anyone have familiarity?” I watch my team do that with each other. And yet, I’m not modeling that for them. It’s like, okay, well, how many people have I pushed away by being this,
oh, I’ve got my act together
rather than that vulnerability of saying, “I don’t, this is new.” I actually like that phrase rather than, “I don’t know.” It’s more like, “Hey, this is new to me. Has anyone done this?” That’s going to create more of a community with my peers than me being the one who shares the information.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Here’s the paradox in the ability to say that you don’t know something. There’s knowledge in having the knowledge that you don’t know something.
MAGGIE: Yeah, that’s true. I didn’t think about it that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’re still exercising some knowledge here. I need to know that I don’t know. And then the act of actually saying, “This is new to me. I need some help. How would you do it?” That’s the follow through.
MAGGIE: Because I do that in other spots of my life. If it’s me and it’s something new for me, I get curious. It’s like, “Oh, okay, what is this person doing?” For some reason, with my leadership, when it’s me, my own competency, there’s a difference between never having done something but it’s innovative versus I’m embarrassed that I’m a leader who does not know how to do an effective plan and hold my team accountable. I’m a leader. I should know how to do that. Does that make sense? It’s sort of like the-
MURIEL WILKINS: It makes absolute sense. You have set an expectation for yourself around what it means to be a leader in your role and, dammit, you’re not meeting the self-imposed expectation. You know what?
MAGGIE: The ideal woman.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know what? This is where the story gets even funnier. So you know what? I’m just going to avoid it even though I’m the one who set that expectation. It’s a good story, right?
MAGGIE: I’m laughing because it’s so true.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s not to say that you shouldn’t have any expectations around your role. It’s recognizing that some of them you already know how to deliver on and, others, you don’t. Anything that’s a should, you’ve got to really look into and say, “Is it really a should? I should know this?”
MAGGIE: Should I? Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Should I? What I’m asking is what’s the new rule that would enable you to be curious in your leadership role for areas where you don’t feel high competency?
MAGGIE: I think there’s a piece of, if I’m sitting here shoving it off to the side, that should be a sign that it’s new to me and to get curious about it. What is actually new here? Where’s the gap and how can I leverage peers, clients, or whatever to close this gap? So, the same curiosity that I bring to new projects is to bring to avoidance.
MURIEL WILKINS: In fact, if you looked at every situation that you’re in where you don’t feel a high level of competency, approach it as a new project because you’ve done new projects and you know the stance you take. You take the stance of curiosity. So we’ve identified what the M.O. has been for you, and we’ve identified how to break it, which is the different approach, the choice you now have because before it was your default was avoid. You now have another door you can go through, which is be curious and approach it like a new project. You mentioned something which was, “When I start avoiding, that should be a signal to me that I should start being curious.”  I’d love to explore how do you swerve before you actually hit the tip of the pothole? Do you have any earlier indicators for yourself that you don’t really feel quite competent around what needs to be done or you just don’t know?
MAGGIE: It actually comes up as anxiety for me. What I do instead is, email becomes suddenly interesting. Tidying up the kitchen becomes way more interesting than doing this. So, I know that there’s some anxiety that comes up. I know what it feels like in my body, if that makes sense, and if I’m really listening to that. But a lot of it is I go weed whacking in the details because that’s safe and comfortable. It’s just sitting there, and I know it’s sitting there. I’m going to go do what I’m competent in over here. That’s probably my signal – is that if I’m going into do stuff that is really just busywork, that really should be my trigger right there that what are you avoiding? Part of it is it’s procrastination. It’s like if I just sit with it and stare at it for a little bit, eventually I’ll be like, “Oh, well, maybe I could break it apart this way. Maybe I could break it that way.” It doesn’t become this giant blob. It’s like, “Okay, now I’ve broken it down into something that’s more digestible and I can tackle this here and tackle that here.”  I just need to get in there and sit with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think you have a couple of signals. You have signal number one. Your body’s trying to tell you, “Hey, pay attention. You’re about to go into avoid-procrastination mode.” Right?
MAGGIE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: It probably hasn’t happened. It’s like, “Hey, over here, listen.” Right?
MAGGIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the beautiful thing is you don’t listen to that, which most of us don’t unless we practice at becoming very mindful of it, which is a practice that you can do. But I’m realistic. We don’t always listen.
MAGGIE: Usually an outside influence that comes and says, “Hey, where is that?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Right, exactly. Exactly. So, first is listening to your body. And then the second is when you recognize,
oh my gosh, I’ve just spent the past, whatever, couple of hours or a day or a week or a month focused on little
menial tasks that give me a sense of accomplishment, but they’re not the things that add value. What is the thing that really adds value that I’m not paying attention to right now? If I’m paying attention to this, what am I not paying attention to?
MAGGIE: That’s great. I like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then if that doesn’t work, that’s when you’re going to start getting the external, i.e. your team saying, “Hey, what’s going on?” So, you’re trying to mitigate for it to get to that level, level three, which is it starts being externally manifested. Maybe a practice for you is even when as you do your to-do list – I don’t know how you keep yourself organized – do your to-do list or even look back on, where did you spend your time the past day or the past week? Are you spending 80% of your time on some of these menial tasks? Well, that’s a signal.
MAGGIE: Yep. That is a signal. I do. I usually do prep the week. What I don’t do is look back on the week. That’s what I need to do is look back and say, “Okay, where did I spend my time, and was it on the stuff that are really adding value?” Or I can tell you right now, I’m pretty sure I was hanging out the details last week.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Right. This is no different than what you need to be doing with your team. You have the plan. You got to look back at the plan. You got to look back at what you did and say, “Did it meet the plan?” This is also part of it. Hold yourself accountable to the plan. That’s how you can start then mirroring it to your team. Everything that we’ve talked about around what you need to do with your team are things that you need to be doing with yourself.
MAGGIE: Yes. The same plan I build for them, I also shove on the shelf for myself, and then I’m using other factors. So, I’m allowing the external world to dictate what’s on my plate when there’s this lovely plan over here that says, “If I do these five things, I’m actually going to move the needle more.” And then our performance cycle shows up and I’m like, “What did I get done?” It’s like, oh, well, here’s my plan. This is what I got done. It’ll just make my life much easier doing this way.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sure will.
MAGGIE: I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, try it. But I think you have to try it in a mindful way, meaning with acute awareness of what might get in the way. I feel like we’re very close to landing the plane. I would just love to hear from you, from our conversation, what’s different for you than when we first started talking?
MAGGIE: I think it’s the awareness of my discomfort with my capability gaps, my own gaps, and just how that turned itself into avoidance. And again, I’ve known this. It’s that mindset shift from “I am not enough” to, “oh, I don’t know something.” It’s a human condition, rather than “I am a problem.” So, it’s more like that’s what’s unlocked for me. It’s like this is my little Achilles heel you might say, but everyone’s got one. So, if I approach this from curiosity, it’ll just make a big difference. And again, when I
do
do the planning, there is a pressure release that comes off. So, I think just now saying, “Hey, maybe I could just be that calm leader who enjoys this.” It’s look for the signals. I know the signals. If suddenly the house becomes the most interesting thing to clean right now, what are you avoiding?
MURIEL WILKINS: Terrific. I hope this was helpful.
MAGGIE: Yeah, it was so helpful. Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’ll be honest here. Something that happens to me more often than not as a coach is that the conversation starts off as one thing, but the real issue ends up being something else. That’s what happened here with Maggie, but it got us to a valuable place. While she entered our coaching session to talk about ways to move her leadership forward, the conversation became more about how she interacts with her team and how she can drive accountability more effectively. That ultimately comes back to her own internal capacity to hold herself accountable which, in the long run, will prove to be the real work that helps her be the leader she wants to be. That’s it for this episode. Next time on
Coaching Real Leaders
…
SPEAKER 4: I am ready to move forward and move fast. I guess where I’m mainly struggling is that I’m not quite sure if the way that I’m moving forward in my career is the best way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’d like to dive deeper into these coaching sessions, join me and the rest of the Coaching Real Leaders community for live episode discussions at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge of your own, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. You can also find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter
@MurielMWilkins
or on Instagram @CoachMurielWilkins. Of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends. Subscribe and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. From HBR presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Make a Career Change when the Odds Are Stacked Against Me?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Victor to protect his confidentiality. He spent much of his career as an attorney and is also neurodivergent.
VICTOR: I’m originally from Latin America and came from a very competitive immigrant background growing up with dyslexia, which was not diagnosed until I was 14 years old. Thanks to the tenacity of my parents, for both academics and didn’t let me give up. Through tutoring, I was able to go forward and especially because there were no possibilities of helping people, even dyslexia wasn’t really the term that was used.
MURIEL WILKINS: Victor identifies as Hispanic and immigrated to the United States to pursue his undergraduate studies and eventually attained his law degree from a prestigious university.
VICTOR: My language abilities, I’m fluent in four languages. I also was very well traveled, informally trained both as an undergrad and in grad school that went parallel with law school in international affairs and that training and my natural abilities… dyslexics, like any other person who has a disability, you can develop much keenly if you can’t read that well but your hearing is excellent. Coming out from a very elite institution, parachute me into great opportunities. The issue has been that as an attorney, especially in large law firms, my ability to show value, which translates into profits through the conventional means of measuring performance and available hours, I had trouble needing that. I’ve been able to show great value in areas that are not conventional or traditional in big law firms and even in government service, which I had great experience with, I’m very good at building relationships.
MURIEL WILKINS: Victor is now at a place where he wants to make a career change. He’s done some diversity, equity, and inclusion work on more of a volunteer basis as a practicing attorney. He’s now looking to transition to that space on a full-time basis, but he’s struggling in getting there. A large part of what fuels his interest in DEI work is his experience as a neurodivergent professional, but he’s keenly aware of the challenges he faced in the past when others were not as open to his dyslexia. And so, I start the conversation by asking Victor how those experiences impact his work today.
VICTOR: I came to grips with a fact that faking my identity is neurodiverse, trying to get around something that inevitably. Even in the best day with the best energy, I would still make mistakes in written work product I had to do. There was just no two ways about it. The problem is that for anybody in my profession as an attorney with dyslexia, you become devalued when you open yourself and say, I have dyslexia, I need accommodations. And that happened to me both in a private sector as well as in government service. If you’re given accommodations, you thrive. If you don’t, you really become what one boss told me, “Well, why do I need you? Because there are people who can crank out work faster than you.” So, in that regard, and that has been my life experience, is you have to position yourself where despite being dyslexic, you can show value and profit where you are. The question is that there could be intervening circumstances that are totally beyond your control. Like a bad boss who frankly told me, “Well, I don’t have a secretary. Why should you?” Put you in a situation where you’re kind of not a risk that an employer wants to take. And as we will discuss, there are very specific excellent roles that I can do and I’m well prepared and I’m even harnessing and building capacity towards those roles. And unfortunately things that I cannot control my age, which is over 50, and the fact that I’ve had to fight and really prevail for my rights in terms of being accumulated makes me not such a, well, not successfully in the job hunting that I have done and I’m still at a very good position as a leader. But the cost of being dyslexic definitely is financial compensation. Unless you are very lucky to continue as I was at one point in my career, succeeding in areas like relationship building, things that don’t depend on reading and writing, you become very vulnerable of being at square one. But the real issue is that over time, the setbacks of putting all the effort that is required for networking, which I’m very good at, putting applications and all that, then the lack of moving forward to an offer has a very big emotional cost. So, the tremendous self confidence that I had is being diminished and that becomes an issue that people can feel and compounds those headwinds. The headwinds for me are a solid, tremendous capacity in leadership and also that I’m preparing myself very well. I even gone back to school now to preparing in not a certificate program, but a program that prepares you as a leader in diversity inclusion.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, tell me for today, in terms of our coaching session, what’s the question that’s come up for you that you want support working through?
VICTOR: Part of it is how to overcome or how to position myself the best that I can as an inspiring leader, but in showing potential and not just showing a background of solid success in leadership. So, how to convince people my record of leadership can translate in fulfilling the aspirations that they have. What I see is that in interviews they would see both age in a very open disability as one. And so my hope is that I can see how to better present myself and truly your ideas of how to overcome the emotional setbacks that I think are natural when you are just not go back for a long period of time and you keep doing it, but you keep being knocked down and you have to stand up and do it again.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it sounds like you have been pursuing new roles and at the same time it’s not just a new role in the field that you’ve been in, but it’s a career transition into DEI or role transition. So, it’s not just about let me get a new position at a new firm or a new company doing something similar to what I was doing before or at the next level. It’s really about getting a new position but also in a field that I have some personal experience having lived through it. And some experience, you’ve had some experience, I know you’ve done some non-profit association work around it, but not having had that specific leadership role in an organization before as a DEI lead. Is that correct?
VICTOR: Correct. In my case, I’m coming from affinity bar associations like Hispanic leadership. I also as an attorney with disabilities. I’m part of the National and, actually, International Dyslexia Association, other associations. And that is very much valued today, but is not really from where I derive my livelihood. What I would love to be able to be paid to do something that I love and that I have a lot to offer because there is this new need not just for people who for window dressing purposes look good in a diversity inclusion role, but really can do short term and long term strategy and implementation.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then it sounds like you’ve put yourself forward for these roles. You have the interviews, it sounds like you get pretty far, but then you don’t get the offer. Right? And have you gotten any feedback from any of the… I know that’s a tricky question, but have you gotten any feedback formally or informally from some of these potential employers around what didn’t get you to the offer?
VICTOR: Because of very good networking, what I have found out is in one position where I was in the final for a diversity inclusion role, I found out that I was just perceived as too old. So, that’s one feedback that confirms the feeling that the ideal candidate is somebody between 30 and upper 40s and on past. The other issue that I have found and it’s hard to get feedback because obviously people who interview don’t want to place themselves in any risk of doing something that would be tolerable is a new situation. But what I found was that people have told me, how can you be interviewing for such a junior role when you should be really in a high senior director role? They say, “We would love to have you as a corporate member, but this is a very junior role.” So, that’s the only feedback that I’ve had. And also, I believe, although that I have no clear evidence in being overqualified because of my age, I think that may be happening. People don’t want to… Why should they go in and hire somebody? Because they focus not in your potential, but they focus more on off. But that’s really a superposition. I’ve never had somebody tell me in my face it’s been this situation of finding out that ageism as well as the issue of being regarded as overqualified. Although I make it clear that in the AI, it’s really a new profession that I’m trying to move into. So, it’s much more adequate for me to go into a junior role because I don’t have the years of being in a top role.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think it’s great that you have some data, right? That’s helpful in terms of understanding why you may not have gotten offers. What I would encourage you to do is also see them as a few points of data and a few points of data does not make the complete story. And more importantly, a few points of data doesn’t necessarily define the story that you need to be telling about why you are a right for the position. Okay. So, when you talk about positioning yourself for any type of role, what you’re really talking about is what is my narrative? What is the story that I share that gives people the hope that you can fulfill the potential that they see for the role. So, this is really important because then you have to pick what informs that narrative. So, when you approach these new roles, how are you positioning yourself?
VICTOR: Well, first of all is the resume because the traditional lawyer resume is not… Right now the problem is also getting through the first filter, which is really artificially intelligence. So, I had someone who is a professional in making sure that your resume is the best that touches on my diversity and inclusion highlights. But since it’s not your typical chronological presentation, that is one issue of getting at least to the interview. And then at the interview, what I find is when they tell me the general question, introduce yourself or tell me why you would be good for the role. I see that although I’m very anxious to make the best impression possible, I’m not getting, and you can see this in the first couple of minutes, I’m not sensing that I’m getting somebody excited about me. And I was telling my kids when I was 17 years old and got to just visit the campus, my English wasn’t even adequate. But the person who just gave me a tour said, “Can you wait and meet the dean because I would love for them to meet you.” And then that dean asked the dean of admissions to see me. All of this fell in my lap, but mostly because I was confident and my story, which included how I dealt with dyslexia was very inspiring. And I have a very solid academic record. But what happens really 45 years later or more is this situation where I have to force myself. It’s not coming as natural as it should of being somebody that really would say, “Oh my God”, as I have been the other side interviewing people, they’re people whose confidence, their authenticity and just to being likable. I think it’s been cut down by a very toxic environment that I had four years before now and going into a new field with that baggage it weighs in those interviews. It would be interesting to get to know with the background that you’re learning on me, how can I be authentic and inspiring at the same time? How is it in the first four or five minutes of an interview what I sense, and perhaps it’s in my imagination, perhaps it’s not happening and there are other reasons. But I do think, and now that you asked about feedback, somebody who highly recommended me for a job said that she got the feedback that I seem very anxious and that is not good because you feel it when you’re interviewed.
MURIEL WILKINS: And do you feel anxious?
VICTOR: Yes. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. To recap where Victor is and where he’d like to go. He came to the conversation with a desire to transition into a new career. And while he can’t quite pinpoint why he’s not landing the roles he wants, he has some hypotheses as to why this might be the case. As his coach, I spent probably more time than usual getting context from Victor because in this case I think it was important given the multiple layers at play. My job is not to dissect every piece and just like my role is not to be an expert in the field of law or DEI, I also don’t need to be an expert in neurodiversity to coach him. But I do need to understand enough context so that I can help him figure out what’s next. And that’s why I gave space to Victor to download. Much of what Victor has shared so far has been on how others experience him. So, I wanted to turn our discussion to the one thing he can control, how he experiences his job interviews and how that helps shape his ability to move forward. Let’s jump back into the conversation to address just that. And so I think a big piece of this is what are you leading with? What is your experience going in? And if we can harness what your experience is, and that’s what you bring to the table, that’s what you bring to the interview, that’s what you bring to those first few minutes. It may not guarantee it, but at least it increases the chances of them experiencing the same thing about you. Just as you did in the past where what you experienced with yourself with self-confidence and what those recruiters experienced through you was, this is a gentleman who’s confident, right? So, right now what’s happening is they are experiencing exactly what you give out. So, this is not about changing the other. This is about looking at yourself and checking yourself and saying, what’s the energy I’m coming in with? What’s the experience that I’m having right now? And if I do want to at least try to influence the experience that these interviewers are having with me, then let me change my own experience. That’s where we start because that’s the only thing as you said, that’s in your control. Okay? So, with that in mind, what do you think you need to let go of in those first four to five minutes of your interviews? Let’s just even focus on that. What do you think you need to let go of prior to coming into the interview?
VICTOR: The feeling that I’m not going to get the job and that’s awful to recognize. And can you imagine as a head of a household with kids, it’s just totally detaching myself from, I could say there were three decades of success and then the past 10 years because really, and this is just something that unfortunately happens, you follow into the hands of bad management and people who, they’re narcissistic, they’re insecure, and then you go over their heads and complain, then they make your life hell. So, that experience, this is what I need to get rid of, is the feeling when I go in. Not what was successful before is that of course I wanted the job, but I would be very good storyteller. I was much more likable than now when those factors age, the aspects that are, I can’t change. This is unfortunately the situation, but all those great credentials, which on the other side you say, “Oh my god, you’re overqualified.” It’s going on with an enthusiastic narrative and being able not to give out that if you want to see it metaphorically, that not pleasantness that people pick up right away.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because it sounds like what’s happened in the past or even the feedback you’ve gotten that maybe it’s about your age, which you can’t change. Your age is your age, is your age, right? I mean there’s really nothing you can change about that. It sounds like what’s happening is you are starting to feed into it, right? You’re starting to believe it. Yeah, this is a problem, I’m a problem. And if you start believing that, you started off this conversation with me saying, “How can I convince people?” Well, I think you have to convince yourself that it’s not a problem. It doesn’t mean that it’s not going to be a problem for other people, but if you can convince yourself that it’s not a problem, then it increases the chances that you’ll find the one or two places or however many places where actually it’s not a problem. And the one or two people or the many more people who don’t see it as a problem, but if you go in with this is a problem, I know it’s a problem because of what’s happened in the past, then that’s what you’re going to convey. Okay, so a big piece of this, what you said around, you said, I need to let go of the feeling of really the fear of not getting the job. All right. And then you also mentioned what’s happened in the past. And so I think what’s happening is when you’re going into these interviews, you actually are not present to what’s happening in the here and now. You’re being pulled to the toxicity that you experience in the past with those disappointing bad bosses. And you’re also focused on what could potentially happen in the future, which is you don’t get the job. And both of those polls are taking away from the power that you can actually bring, the enthusiasm that you can bring in the present moment in that interview. The only thing that you can focus on right now is what Victor needs to show up in that interview. Is it the Victor from the past? Is it the Victor of the potential future or is it the Victor today? And if it’s the Victor today, then who’s that Victor? Your choice, you describe him. So, who’s that Victor? Let’s make believe we’re in an interview and you’re about to go in. Who’s the Victor who shows up? How do you want to experience yourself?
VICTOR: I’m someone that to my personal, my academic and my professional experience as a leader in diversity and inclusion, mission driven organizations can partner with you to be where the job description says you would like someone to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: But let me ask you this, Victor. Why you? Let’s think about, you want to do DEI work. Why you? What is that secret sauce that would make you want to hire you in a DEI role?
VICTOR: Because I bring who I am, which is a unique combination for the role. I have a sterling academic credentials. And especially now with the growth of demand D&I professionals, I’m actually enrolling a program that combines the right elements to enable leaders to not only do it because they have practical experience in D&I, which I have in leadership from the early two thousands onward. But I have, as an immigrant, the cultural competencies that are needed to be able to show empathy and to convince both to have the buy-in internally from corporate or academic leadership where I’ll be working to see the importance of overcoming issues with the best intentions, people who have biases, how to deal with biases, for example. I have also the background which is unique not only being an immigrant, but coming from immigrants, which I think puts you in an advantageous position because it broadens your ability to understand and work through issues. As a dyslexic and being a leader in neurodiversity, I bring also something that I discussed with other neurodiverse leaders, which is that if they put somebody in a D&I position where they don’t come from a minority background, Hispanic and that legacy of immigrants who came to Latin America and who have to build their position in countries that were really not countries made of immigrants like the United States. So, you come knowing what it is to come from a marginalized position and then getting to the United States and making it through and really being a beneficiary as well as one who has opened opportunities for Hispanics, whether it’s students or professionals. That is a unique vantage point as somebody who has been successful having a disability. Somebody who comes from one of the very important segments of what BNI is as a Hispanic, and having the training both as an attorney and as a graduate, I would say really as a lifelong learner of international affairs from the standpoint of understanding how to achieve success with very different cultures and creating effective alliances. So that’s what I bring, it’s documented in my record and it’s also what I enjoy to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, all of that is your uniqueness, all of that is your differentiator. What distinguishes you. And yet it sounds like when you’ve gone into these interviews or what you’ve experienced so far is more a focus on what you lack rather than what you bring.
VICTOR: Yeah, I would say it is what I describe of what I have, what I bring to the table. It’s there. Here, it’s harder for me to overcome the kind of freezing feeling of fear once I’m in the interview that it is just that way that you were describing or how to check it in the door and then come in fresh and not reflecting in the past or in the future in the here and now. I’m reminded that what FDR said of the worst thing to fear is fear itself. Fear is something that is there and it really would affect me when I’m trying to explain why I bring really unique characteristics that I shared with you and in the context of being overqualified, that’s an aspect that has a bit put me kind of out of space. I would feel that if somebody’s overqualified, it adds value. But that’s something that is a presumption to overcome. Dealing with that is just part of this package.
MURIEL WILKINS: It is it, and I hear you trying to do a couple of things. One is how do I convince and sort of change people’s bias, which could be organizational, it could be the person sitting in front of you. And then on the other side of it is how do I manage my own bias for fear? But what is bias? Bias is you’re leaning into something, you lean into a particular side and what you’re leaning into is the fear. So, this is not to suggest that you get rid of fear. I heard you use those words, I just need to get rid of it. It’s not get rid of it. It’s acknowledging that it’s there and choosing that at least for the next 30 minutes of your interview, it’s not what you’re going to focus on and what you’re going to lead from because it doesn’t help you in that situation.
VICTOR: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think one is let go of the, I need to convince people. You don’t need to convince anybody else. That’s not the job. You need to represent yourself. And if it lands, it lands. If it doesn’t land, it doesn’t land. It wasn’t meant to land. But your mission is to represent yourself and your capabilities and your passion as effectively as possible. Okay? It’s like when you plant seeds, you try to get healthy seeds and then you hope you have healthy soil. And if you do have the chance to cultivate the soil, you cultivate the soil. But in this case, you don’t really have the chance to cultivate the soil. You’re just sort of throwing it out there, throwing the seeds out. But let’s make sure the seeds are healthy. And so how does that land with you in terms of what you bring to the table?
VICTOR: It’s very useful. So, my immediate reaction to that is that I bring to the table unique characteristics that are very advantageous for any of the roles that I mentioned. Whether in academia or in the private sector. It is a unique background that I can go into an organization and do a good fight and manage to have… My greater satisfaction would be that people like myself, whether because of being Hispanic, whether because of having any type of especially invisible disabilities, they can thrive and not have to be inauthentic. That would be for me the greatest. And I did it before, so I want to do it again. And that combination of an excellent professional record that is aligned with what is required in this position’s relationship building, cultural and international competencies, a knowledge of the organizational aspects of foundations of B and I that I have them. And that is definitely a competitive edge. And that’s what I have to focus here.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I love the fact, because you told me you came from a competitive background and you have literally spent your whole life being somewhat of an outlier and in your own unique way in unconventional ways succeeding.
VICTOR: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what’s interesting to me, Victor, is that kind of hasn’t changed. I think what’s sort of happening is as you are transitioning into or attempting to transition into a new career, you are positioning yourself or representing yourself as a “traditional candidate” or hoping that you’re accepted as somebody who can fit the exact mold of this role. But what you’ve always brought to the table is actually something that’s unique. That can add value in a different way.
VICTOR: Right. It’s nonconventional.
MURIEL WILKINS: Nonconventional. And so, what you just said around, do you see what you bring to the table as something that could actually give a competitive advantage to the organization, to the role? Do you believe that?
VICTOR: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so what would it take for you to enter these conversations for new positions in a way where you demonstrate that belief?
VICTOR: Part of it is exactly what you said. That focusing on presenting myself rather than trying to do the check marking of how I fit the job description, that’s very important. That’s something that I can hold on, that it is simple, of course it’s also very profound, but it’s something good to keep in mind, which I had not before this conversation had, is the issue of the interview is for me to present myself rather than to sell myself. That’s a very good aspect that I think will inform and therefore help me both strategically and emotionally as to how I go in and not have this focus on fear, but rather let me introduce myself. And this is what I’ve done. I’ve done a lot of readings, which this is from advice to people who are looking for talent in these times. The post pandemic has a lot of opportunities open, and the focus on diversity and inclusion is no longer like the cherry on top of the ice cream. It’s a necessity both from its business case as well as morally, politically. That is where corporations that are succeeding should be. And I am a good catalyst for bringing about the day to day. And I’ve developed a very good vision that is supported by my personal background, which has, I said this to a friend, I’m three for the price of one. I’m Hispanic, I’m dyslexic, and as an immigrant, which itself comes with all that intersection of qualities. I came with that strength of being immigrant of immigrants and having that capacity to be a cultural chameleon, to be able to read the cultural landscape.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I sense is in your story or how you position yourself is you have the passion around DEI, which is informed by your lived experience, so that’s one pillar. You have leadership skills that may not have happened in a DEI role, but that are transferable, relationship building, being able to see the landscape, be able to think strategically, be all of the sort of some general leadership skills. Again, transferable even though you may not have experienced them specifically in this type of role. And then I think the third pillar, which we haven’t talked about yet is, are you positioning those two things, lived experience and passion, as transferable leadership skills? Are you positioning them in the right context? Meaning are you seeking out roles and organizations where what you have to offer from those two pillars is relevant?
VICTOR: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how do you know this?
VICTOR: Well, I know this because it comes both objectively and just emotional intelligence that I read a job description and I’m like, this is excellent. This is something I would… Speaking hypothetically, if I could do it as a volunteer, this is what I would love to do. So, I’m not positioning myself in situations and not just applying like should at will, and I’m benefiting that still. Now, there are plenty of positions, and it was not just my love for diversity, equity, and inclusion that have guided me into already a year ago going into this two year program parallel to continuing my practice. But it’s really because there is a growing need for this type of professionals, and I’m always halfway way in the job descriptions because of who I am and then my credentials, academic and professionally support that. So, I am positioning myself thanks to the availability of open positions, D& I to those positions. The fact that I haven’t been successful is a different story.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, we’ve already established probably a big part of why you haven’t been successful is because of how you’ve entered those conversations. I will say though, when I just asked you this question and you showed me the piece of paper and you said yes. I look at the position and how it’s written and it’s exactly what I want. That’s just a piece of paper. That is also their check the box. What we’re uncertain of just by the piece of paper is what’s the internal, what’s the gut of the organization? What’s the culture of the organization? What’s the actual need that they have, that intangible need that you could make a difference in? Let’s take a quick breather here because we’re starting to get further clarity on the questions that Victor needs to answer in order to be able to tactically land the role he desires. And these questions are not unique to him. They’re the ones that I encourage many of my clients to explore when they consider any role transition. The first is how are you positioning yourself? Are you walking in with the energy that you would want to experience from the candidate if you were on the hiring end? Second, where are you positioning yourself? What is the cultural landscape and the DNA of the place? And third, is there a match between what you uniquely offer and what the organization not only needs, but actually wants? Let’s dive back in as I asked Victor about how he is currently leveraging those three things as he seeks out new roles in organizations.
VICTOR: I’m a hundred percent with you and doing more homework in terms of finding out what you can find out behind the job description, behind the website or an organization. It’s ultimately you have to do it. It’s something you cannot elude if you’re going to do your homework on it. But I think I can give myself more time after this conversation, what I’m getting out of it in trying to do more intelligence work in finding out that they are real in what they’re looking in diversity. And if they are not, do they have the sincere desire to change?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think what’s happening here is that you are getting clearer around, Hey, I bring an unconventional profile to a DEI role, which means that it probably is worthy that I look for organizations who also want to take an unconventional approach to DEI.
VICTOR: That’s very good.
MURIEL WILKINS: But if you are saying, hey, it would be… I mean, think about it on the flip side, Let’s just choose a different topic. Let’s say I’m a conventional CFO, but I go and I’m looking for roles and I’m interviewing at places who want to take a very unconventional approach. Probably CFO’s probably not a good example because we don’t want to be too unconventional when it comes to finances, but there could be creative financing or whatnot, then it’s a mismatch. Okay? So, I think step number one is who is VICTOR in what he brings in terms of passion and experience? And then is he offering those things in the spaces that can actually hold that, that are worthy of what you bring to the table?
VICTOR: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s a little bit of me, Victor, that kind of says, I don’t know. I mean, maybe you give yourself some grace, give yourself some credit in the fact that some of those situations that didn’t pan out and you didn’t get the offer might have been a silver lining from repeating some of the experiences that you’ve had in the past. We don’t know. Take a look at yourself and what’s your story and what do you need to bring to the table, et cetera. But also understand that you also need to be looking at them and saying, what are they bringing to the table? What is this organization doing? How are they going to treat me when I come in here? What kind of change do they want to make? What kind of impact do they want to make? And is it aligned with the way that I want to lead, the way I want to work, what I have to bring to the table and the impact that I want to make? So, I think what you’re looking for is alignment. And in order to really be able to identify that alignment, you’ve got to be aligned with yourself first.
VICTOR: Yeah, this is very useful for me and I think that you can share this situation that if you read job descriptions for professionals, diversity, equity, inclusion, some of them look like they copy and paste from others because it’s just what best corporation, that conversation that I had, you are an attorney, why would you like to go into HR? And these are people who, if you read their job description, the organization is presenting themselves so well. But it just reinforces my suspicious of this is just a copy and paste because they need to have somebody in the storefront of DEI.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And so, what we want to bring this back to kind of the beginning of our conversation, let’s make sure that you’re not copying and pasting.
VICTOR: That’s very good.
MURIEL WILKINS: How you describe yourself and how you position yourself and you’re also not copying and pasting your past experiences in terms of how you feel into what you’re experiencing in the present moment for that interview. No copying and pasting.
VICTOR: Or the positive one is that I’ve had tremendous success in the past and just there’s this footnote of having fall into a handsome bad management for a couple of years that derailed me, but I’m in the right path.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, let me ask you a question, Victor. I don’t know, maybe I’m going to like out myself here. Do you read every footnote? In everything that you read?
VICTOR: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I loved that you described the negative past experiences that you had that have had an impact on you in terms of emotionally what you’re going through here as footnotes. What are footnotes meant to do?
VICTOR: It’s just if you need more detail, but they’re not the essential part should be in the main text.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, treat it as that we’re not going to redline them out. I’m using your language now because you’re an attorney. Right. We’re not going to redline it out, we’re going to leave it, but it’s a footnote. It’s a detail that you rely on if you need it, and clearly we’ve established you don’t need that footnote in these interviews.
VICTOR: Very good. Very good. Thank you. I mean, it’s a very refreshing and different frame that I feel. I mean, it’s not only the information that goes through the intellect, but I feel that can be a game changer for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. In what way do you think the feeling has changed for you?
VICTOR: The feeling has changed in how our conversation began where I was sharing with you how the day was cloud with very gray clouds and the clouds are how that footnote that those falling into the hands of bad managers school. This person told me in my face, for example, I don’t have a secretary, why should you, that thought dyslexia was just an excuse to break away with that in clearing to a beautiful blue skylight, what we have today, is that one as much as it looks very nice in paper, it may not be the organization and the people that I would like to work for. And second that I do cherish and I have to be able to bring that forth, those unique characteristics, those very relevant, transferable skills. And that should be what informs my narrative and that bring not being uncomfortable to say, “Look, I’ve succeeded through unconventional means, but rather this is really the deck of cards that I’ve been dealt with and I’ve really squeezed every benefit from them”, and especially because of being really the way that I’ve dealt with those setbacks is actually just a glimpse into the potential that I breathe.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Oh my goodness. You’ve inspired me.
VICTOR: Well, that’s good
MURIEL WILKINS: So, thank you. Thank you. I think we can land here. I think we can close here.
VICTOR: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: When Victor came into the coaching meeting, he was questioning his ability to move into a new role and into a new career. Given his background and at this stage of his professional life, by the end of our conversation, he shifted from viewing those things as obstacles to overcome to what makes him a differentiated candidate who can really add value for the right organization and his ability to make that shift was not new for Victor. It’s a strategy he’s used his whole life. My role as his coach was to just help him figure out how to use it in this situation. Not everyone will relate to Victor’s place in life as someone more advanced in his career or as someone who’s neurodivergent. But there truly are lessons here for anyone who has tried to transition into a new role. Or on the flip side, those who might be in a hiring position trying to decide whether a candidate is right for a role. The simple question of asking how is diversity, a strength and value add in this role rather than an obstacle, is what can make the world of difference in how they move forward. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
EPISODE 4 GUEST: A big turning point for me was I took that role seriously about developing people around me and getting results through them and was able to really slough off the, it’s about me and what I can do mentality that in my own words, just plagues the management in our industry.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn @ Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with our leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com and of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it
with
your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Fast-Track My Career?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
Today’s guest, who we’ll call “Catherine” to protect her confidentiality, is someone who has risen quickly in her career.
CATHERINE: I was the first one from my family to graduate college. When I was in college, I had several high-profile internships in government. When I got into the real world, I realized I needed to find work that aligned with my skillset. So I joined — it’s a very large firm, and I started out in a role that didn’t exist. Every single one of my roles at my current company has never existed before.
MURIEL WILKINS: Catherine is ambitious and she’s jumped at opportunities when they have come up.
CATHERINE: I joined the office of the global chairman and CEO. In that role, I had tremendous opportunities. I even went to Davos, so I’ve had tremendous experience. When I was looking for the next steps in my career, there were some roadblocks in trying to move myself forward. I was the youngest on the team, I was the most junior on the team. I created an automation solution to do part of my role. And so, I used a bot to move myself forward. When I did so, I thought, “this could be a good way for me to learn more of the business side of the company.” That’s what I did. I’m now a formal leader on the team. I am the leader of the strategy group and on this leadership team, I’m now the only female out of 10 leaders.
MURIEL WILKINS: Catherine has recently come back to work after maternity leave and stepped into a new role as a leader of a strategy group, but she’s already thinking about the best next steps for her career with an eye towards a chief of staff type of role. She’s also used to being the only in a lot of rooms, so I started our coaching meeting by asking her what that feels like.
CATHERINE: I thrive in it. It’s important to me that when I am only, I speak up for myself. One interesting situation that happened with me is when I did come back and I was named the strategy leader, I got added to a call that was for the leadership team and it was at night. It was one of those things where I’m like, “This is a trade-off. Do I take the time away from my family to be on this nightly call that happens once a week?” At first, I downplayed it and my husband and I made accommodations and I was on the call and I was on video and I was an active participant, but it was not sustainable. It was a very difficult time slot and there was no one else on that call who was worried about feeding their family dinner and doing bedtime when the kids are screaming for only mom outside the door. I talked actually to a colleague of mine who was another working mom and she told me, she said, “If you don’t say something now, think about the precedent you’re setting for the next working mother to join your team.” So I wrote my talking points and I got on a call with our team leader and I pitched basically why the call should be at a different date and time. He looked at me and he goes, “That time doesn’t work for my schedule anymore anyways, so I needed that call to move off my schedule.” So it’s been very interesting. As I am finding myself in situations where I’m the only one, I do sit back and make sure that what I’m asking for, even if it’s unique to me, that it will benefit someone else. That’s important to me that I like being different. I also think that’s why I’ve always made my own roles, but this is where I kind of come back to my problem statement of how do I make a future role if I don’t even know what it looks like.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because you speak with such clarity and yet here you are. And so, it seems like up until now — I mean, really throughout your career, you’ve sort of invented or created the roles that you’ve been in. Now, you’re in a situation where you want to map out what your future looks like, but it’s not clear what that future should look like because the role might not necessarily exist. Is that right?
CATHERINE: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: OK. So tell me what you’ve been reflecting on that, what’s been coming up for you as you think through that question.
CATHERINE: It started because I am ready to move forward and move fast. As I sit in this environment with opportunities that have come to me and even opportunities that I’ve sought out, I am finding roles where I meet some of the qualifications, but I guess, where I’m mainly struggling is that I’m not quite sure if the way that I’m moving forward in my career is the best way. I’m looking forward to this really exciting time in my life where I know that I can do really big things. I feel like it’s a very good time for me to accelerate right now, but one of my questions that I had for you is what’s more important, having kind of a short term, maybe 18-month, two-year goal versus a five-year versus a 15-year plan? How do I kind of map out these next steps when I feel like I’m ready to go now?
MURIEL WILKINS: OK, I’m hearing a couple of things, Catherine. I’m hearing I’m ready to go now and I’m also hearing, but I’m not sure what I’m going to.
CATHERINE: Yeah, that’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, there lies the misalignment in the formula. Let’s just sort of unpack both ends because I think there’s a question around pace and acceleration, as you put it. Like you’re ready to accelerate now and I’m curious around why now? Not that there’s anything wrong with it, but what is it about the timing? Then there’s a question around accelerate to what or go to what, and what is that what look like? You pick which one would you like to start with.
CATHERINE: I think I can answer the why accelerate now faster.
MURIEL WILKINS: Of course because it’s all about acceleration. Of course, you can do it fast. So why now? Why do you feel this what I call the way I feel? When I accelerate, the day I feel like I need a haircut, I’m like, “It’s got to happen today. It can’t happen tomorrow.” My poor hair stylist, I text her. I’m like, “Could you see me today?” She’s like, “Next week.” I’m like, “No, today. It has to happen today.” That’s what I think about in terms of the energy I’m getting from you like it has to happen now. Why now?
CATHERINE: The first part of this is that I see other young female leaders in the world and I’ve always asked myself, “How does that female CEO get there? What are the defining points in her career that have propelled her forward?” In my role that I’m in now, it’s clicking. I can connect the dots in a way that I’ve never done before. Now that I am hearing for the first time that I am a leader, I am having other working moms come to me for advice and I’ve built this incredible network that has spanned both my global role and the role that I’m in today, where I have the resources. I do go to these very trusted mentors and the one who has guided me the most has actually told me that I need to get to the next level in the next two years. And so, this is a really exciting time, and I tend to work very fast. My turnaround times are very quick. This morning, I got an email asking if we could have an hour call tonight on a communication. And I drafted the communication in 10 minutes and sent it off, and they were like, “This is exactly what we needed to do.” I don’t like to waste time talking about things. I like to do things. Sometimes it gets me into trouble. What I’ve learned is there is this pace of hurry up and wait that I’ve always been following. And the interesting part is the second piece that I don’t really know what I’m waiting for.
MURIEL WILKINS: How will you know that you have figured out what it is that you want to move towards?
CATHERINE: I think that’s my problem. When I look at my role now, I don’t see myself long-term, but where I know I want to go in the company, there need to be several chess pieces that move, but those pieces are out of my control. I don’t know if now is the right time for me to move from my company to another company. I’m not really sure if I need to fulfill what has been my dream in this company where I have a much higher profile role. I want to be a chief of staff, I want to be an executive, and I have a very great example of a woman who I respect tremendously, who went from the level that I am now. Within the past eight years, she has moved from director and chief of staff to now she is on a board of a very prominent company. I’ve seen it happen around me. I just don’t really know what that looks like for myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here to reflect on the dual problem that Catherine is facing — that many people face. She wants to figure out how to get to that next level, but she hasn’t really figured out what exactly that next level even is. When caught in this type of situation, it’s often easy to know what you don’t want in that next role. It’s just as important, if not more so, to know what you do want. But that can be hard for some to articulate. Let’s jump back in as I ask Catherine to lean in to the what do I want question.
So when you think about this chief of staff / executive role — and by the way, are you using those two terms interchangeably because there’s chief of staff and then there’s executive, and chief of staff is an executive? Or are there other executive type roles that you’re interested in?
CATHERINE: I almost think about it as a progression. So two different roles, starting out with chief of staff to moving into the executive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. Ultimately, you see yourself as being in a very senior executive role.
CATHERINE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: At the C-suite?
CATHERINE: I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: You think so or you know so?
CATHERINE: I know so.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know so. I’m not trying to pressure you, I’m just saying you tend to speak with a lot of clarity. When we start putting a stake in the ground, it doesn’t mean that we’re like, “Oh no, what if I say that and it doesn’t happen?” But they also do happen, so you do need to name it. I do think you have clarity — your goal is to be a C-level executive at some point in your career.
CATHERINE: I mean, that sounds good hearing it for the first time. I think I’ve never said those words before, but that is where I want to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: What has kept you from saying those words?
CATHERINE: I think from not being around that world. I’ve always had this seat at the table and I’ve learned so many fabulous lessons from these leaders, but I think I’ve always seen the sausage getting made. It’s interesting for this leadership meeting that I recently attended, it was the first time that, post pandemic, I was able to see everyone and to meet a lot of people that I hadn’t before and here I am going into this meeting at a leader level. In the past, I would’ve been invited to that as a support person. I told my husband, “I am so worried.” This is how funny it is. I’m not worried about the pre-reads because the pre-reads are done, my presentation for the meeting is ready to go. I feel like I’m prepped. I have the power outfit to walk into that room, but who ordered lunch? I said, “I am not going to ask about lunch,” because by asking about it, then it might become my responsibility. The one thing that has always been in the back of my mind is that I went from the person who had to get the lunch. Making this kind of fundamental mindset shift from what are all the little details to let’s zoom out and really focus on the piece that I’m in the room for, which is the strategy and stakeholder management piece, and also, the importance of being in the room and making those connections. I now feel like I’m part of the conversation and I think that’s been my main hang up and thinking about the fact that I want to be a chief of staff and that I want to be a C-suite executive. I’m just now starting to see myself in those shoes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re seeing it. It hasn’t fully become a reality yet, and if I may, I’m going to mirror back what I think I’m sensing from you. I’m sensing that you fear that if you don’t make that executive role a reality soon, that you’ll be stuck in the who’s ordering the lunch role.
CATHERINE: You are exactly right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Where does that story come from?
CATHERINE: I’ve had leaders on both sides of things. I’ve had leaders who have said, “You are fantastic. We need to get you more recognition.” And that’s the role that I’m in right now. But in the past, I have been in roles where it’s you do all the work and I’m going to steal the credit for it. There have also been situations where I have voiced an unpopular opinion that has been very controversial. The responses that I’ve gotten have made me kind of question my judgment at some situations. But it’s times like these where I’m in this role where all of those difficult conversations where people were saying, “You’re not ready for promotion,” or, “We don’t have the head count,” or “You didn’t spend 10 years in a traditional role.” I did question, maybe I am moving too quickly or too differently, but I’m now being rewarded for that because it’s the way that I think differently, it’s the way that I bring this executive presence that I’ve learned from being the most junior, the youngest in the room, to now that I’m the youngest, most junior at the table, I can see both sides of it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, here’s the thing. You’ve named what it is that you want in terms of, at some point in your career being a C-suite level executive. You have also named sort of the “fear that lingers” that you’re concerned about what might hold you back. It’s sort of staying in the dual role in the, for lack of better words, kind of the grunt role where you started. There’s a saying sometimes, don’t forget where you came from and you want that to be a part of you, but you also don’t want to stay stuck there either, but there is some goodness that came out of it, so how do you carry that forward. You use the term your ability to be able to, you want to be able to zoom out and not stay stuck in the zooming in. What I will tell you is that effective leaders are able to do both. They’re able to zoom out and they’re able to zoom in. They’re able to discern when one is right versus the other. And so, right now, you’re in a position of learning more how to zoom out because you’re being exposed to more. You have clarity around what you want. There’s this, I’m still really curious about the pace at which you get it because that’ll help determine what the path is that you take in terms of how fast you want to make it happen. That said, I think you’re focusing a lot on what is the right path. It’s almost like you’ve decided this is the town that I want to go to on my road trip. Now, you’re trying to figure out what is the… You’re using ways and you’re like, “What is the route with the least amount of traffic that’s going to directly get me there?” You don’t really pay attention like me as to whether it’s going to make you make a left turn on the busy street, which is impossible. You’re sort of looking at what’s the most linear direct way to get there. What you’re not paying attention to or what I’m not hearing you say is what are you picking up along the way.
CATHERINE: I do see exactly what you’re saying. I am a bit of a perfectionist, where I see the place that I need to get to and I just get there. My other problem statement was that I want to make sure that I’m getting the right experiences out of the role that I’m in now to set me up for that chief of staff and also the C-suite executive role. I can make this role that I’m in my own. I want to make sure that I’m learning exactly what I need to get to the next step.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think that question will be more helpful to you than how fast should I be moving? Should it be here? Should it be elsewhere? What’s the most accelerated path there? Not to say that we can’t pay attention to those things, but I think in order to be able to answer those questions around how fast and where, there’s a first level question, a first level order question, which is what muscles do you need to build to best position you to be able to get to that next step that you’ve identified in terms of being a global chief of staff and then ultimately to get into a C-suite level position. And so, based on the work that you’ve done and the mentors that you’ve had and the research that you’ve done at this point, what are the areas that you feel like you have strengths in that you’d be able to contribute as a chief of staff role, and then there are gaps that you think you’d need to start demonstrating or need to build, have some at-bats in so that you can be better positioned?
CATHERINE: The first thing that comes to mind is I can have a very comfortable conversation with any leader at my firm. I have very good executive presence and I feel comfortable speaking at a leadership level. I don’t have a lot of experience with the junior ranks at our firm. I kind of came in at the mid-level and only worked with the most senior. I’m just now in my role, starting to get exposure to the straight out of college, very beginner in their career, and I really don’t know how to speak to them. Even though I’m very similar in age, I kind of equated back to when I was growing up, I was much more comfortable at a dinner conversation than I was at a kid’s birthday party. I’ve been in the room with executives for so long. I know exactly what to say and I don’t have much experience with the staff part.
MURIEL WILKINS: Here’s the risk in all this. I’m just going to be honest with you. This comes down to a choice of path that you want to take. The path of a chief of staff is you could really become a very… and this is not in all organizations, but definitely possible in some, you could become a very senior individual contributor. It sounds like that’s actually the path that you’ve been on. You’ve risen through the ranks at an accelerated rate, learning how to manage up and learning how to manage stakeholders. It sounds like it’s been a lot of external stakeholders, managing relationship. What you haven’t picked up as of yet, it sounds like, is learning how to manage others. To be able to do the things that you’re actually concerned, you’re going to be the one stuck doing them, i.e. ordering the lunch.
CATHERINE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Do you need those skills of managing others? It depends. If you’re going to be a very senior individual contributor, you might not. There is a possibility around that track, not everywhere, but certainly somewhere. But if you want to be in the C-suite, which basically means you’re scaling management others in a much broader way, in a much bigger and significant way, then you would want to have some experience of not only learning how to manage others, but then learning how to manage the managers who manage others. And so, it sounds like up until now, you haven’t had that opportunity.
CATHERINE: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: This brings us back to this notion of, is it really a question of how fast, or is it a question of what are the experiences that you need to get that are going to support you in that role. If you want to be a C-suite level leader, sounds like what is going to best position you, you already have the executive presence down, you already have being able to operate with senior level people down, the part that you don’t have is how do you manage others so that they can do the work in whatever function it is that you’re going to be leading and running.
CATHERINE: Absolutely. Where I struggle with my initial interactions with managing others has been, I never want to put the staff that I’m working with in the same place where they feel like I did. Some of my hardest lessons that I learned were in those situations. You’ve now opened my mind to another door. I kind of shared with you for the first time that I not only want to be a chief of staff, but I also want to be an executive at the C-suite level, but now I see that there’s also both of those pass independently. It’s interesting to me, because if I focus on the experience that I can get now, which is working with others, kind of managing others, it gets back to that individual contributor level because I need to take myself out of that equation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Talk to me a little bit about that. What do you mean take yourself out of the equation?
CATHERINE: When I was in previous roles, I came into situations where I would do all of the work, but I wasn’t there for the presentation. What I’m weary of is that when I start managing others, I don’t want to take the credit for their work.
MURIEL WILKINS: Gotcha.
CATHERINE: I’m still in that mindset of I want to uplift others. I want to make sure that team members are getting the recognition that they need. I also am not the kind of person who is going to be threatened by someone else doing an excellent job.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what you are articulating here is more what your management philosophy will be rather than actual management skills, you’re guiding principles in terms of how you decide to treat the people that are on your team and your team members and others. That’s important. It is important. Similarly to how we looked into what do you see for your future, and I said, “Oh, you shifted from articulating what you don’t want to articulating what you want.” What I would encourage you to do when you start thinking about what your management philosophy is or your management approaches or style, don’t focus so much on what you don’t want it to be. Focus more on what you want it to be. It’s no different than what it sounds like an excellent job you’ve done in managing up. It’s been very intentional around how you want or have wanted those senior level people to experience you. Obviously, it’s paid off. It’s the same in managing others. How do you want them to experience you? With that, then you can determine, okay, well then, when do I give credit? What’s the tone do I use? What are the types of things that I ask for or don’t ask for? That’s one piece of it. The other bucket that I think you need to pay attention to in terms of really building your management chops is really just, I’m just going to be really crude here, it’s just really good management hygiene. What kind of systems do you set up? How do you hire people? How do you fire people? How do you give them feedback? How do you develop them so that they can reach circles? All of the, as you called it, the sausage making behind management, and it’s a brick-by-brick endeavor. One of the biggest pitfalls that people run into when they get accelerated very quickly through their career pipeline is that they are phenomenal star performers. That doesn’t mean that they are excellent phenomenal managers. Just because you get promoted because you’re a great star performer at an individual level doesn’t mean that you’re going to succeed as a manager. And so, now, the question becomes, is it possible for you to build that management muscle in the role that you’re in given the flexibility that you have to create it? Is it possible in your organization or do you have to go somewhere else where the conditions are riper for you to be able and the opportunities are there for you to build that muscle? Where can you build it most quickly since that speed is of importance to you? I’ll turn that back over to you as you look at the landscape, what seems possible?
CATHERINE: It’s a very timely conversation because I actually just pitched my leader the team that I need to build out. I do think this is a very important time for me to kind of start small, but to your point, I think I need to assess how far I can take that experience. There are others on the team who are managing a lot more people and I am learning a lot just from observing them. And so, I wonder if I take this hybrid approach where I utilize the skills of becoming a manager myself, but also to learn from others who are managers, but it gets back to what you were saying about the management philosophy and the management hygiene. Mine is very different from everyone else’s on my team. I think this could be a unique opportunity for me to continue to show how being different and thinking in a different way could help the team benefit.
MURIEL WILKINS: You kind of want to think about it as you’re building the house and then you want to decorate the house. The building the house is what we talked about just having those management systems. I mean, you can look at it through people that you work with. You can read a ton of books on just management systems, watch videos go to an executive education class, take training. All those things will teach you kind of the systems to put in place. That’s the building the foundation of the house. Then it’s how do I overlay those systems with my, as we called it, my philosophy, my approach, which by the way, happens to be different than what I see in terms of my colleagues and how they manage. That’s more the decorating the house. What’s the energy that I give the house? What does it feel like? What does it smell like? What does it look like? Yeah, you’re going to define that for yourself and you’re going to define it by contrast, by looking at some people and saying, “That’s not the way I want to do it,” so you learn how to define that by contrast. You’ll also learn it by mirroring or modeling what you see in others. If you’re not finding those others in your company, then leverage one of the skills that you have, which is to create relationships and go out there and find mentors and network with people until you identify a few people who you’re like, “I like their management approach. Let me talk to them. How do they do it? How do they treat their people?”
CATHERINE: I think that is exactly what I need to do for my next step. My follow up question would be what are some of the other areas where I might need to use this time and this role to get exactly what I need to propel me. To your point, I’m ready to move fast and maybe there is this opportunity for me to take these experiences that I need and continue to move at the same pace, or maybe it is I’m going to find them challenging or need to invest more time and to slow down a little bit depending on what opportunities are in place. And so, what else do I need to really focus on?
MURIEL WILKINS: This is an important turning point in the conversation because we’ve started breaking down exactly what she’s looking for, then breaking those into even smaller parts. In order to get where she wants to go and at the pace that she wants, there should be a plan in place. And so, I dug deep with her on the management piece, identifying exactly what skills she has, which she needs to develop and maybe which she doesn’t want to develop depending on what kind of role she really wants. The value here is in the specifics. Let’s wrap up the conversation now with some of the concrete things Catherine can do next.
I mean, when you think about folks who make it to very senior level, there’s usually four components. To that I would consider price of admission. The first is just technical skills, that you have an area of expertise in something. If you’re the CFO, it’s in finance. If you’re the chief marketing officer, then it’s marketing. There’s that. The second, which is also price of admission is the functional skill. The technical skill is the subject matter itself. The functional skill is now, how do I run a function around that skill that’s going to provide and add value to the company. Doesn’t mean that I’m doing it, but I understand how this function runs. Those two things are price of admission. I would say you have to start asking yourself, what’s my technical expertise, if any, and you don’t have to have a true, true, but is there something that I’m known for in terms of what I can contribute from a subject matter standpoint, and then what is the function or functions that I’m either interested in or where I think I can add value or function that I would like to lead at some point? Then the third and the fourth are what I see as the differentiating factors. They are, number one, are you differentiated as a leader? Do you know how to lead? Are you able to articulate a vision and are you able to take stakeholders from point A to point B towards the vision and all the things that come up under leadership skills? And so, it might behoove you to, at some point, kind of go through some type of leadership assessment, so that you can take inventory where others can evaluate you on where they see you relative to each of those competencies and that might give you a better sense of what your strengths are and then where some of the gaps might be that you need to close. There’s the leadership skills and then the other differentiator is just having really strong business acumen, understanding business fundamentals. Just because, let’s say, you said, “Hey, yes, I want to be at the C-suite level. I want to be the chief marketing officer,” does not mean you should not know what the business fundamentals of that company are.
CATHERINE: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: I laid out those buckets. I don’t have enough of a sense of you in terms of where your skills are or where they are not to tell you, “Oh, for you specifically, Catherine, here are the gaps that you need to close,” but it lays out a framework where you ought to take some stock and take some inventory, again, by getting feedback and you’ll be better able to articulate what are the areas that you have potential in, but that you need to have more experience in so that you can best position yourself in terms of readiness for a senior level role.
CATHERINE: I actually did an assessment right before I became named leader and the assessment found that the only piece of feedback that I received to work on was that I needed to be better at giving feedback to staff. I think it connects back to our conversation about the experience that I really need is going to be managing a team.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, that points it to the whole managing team. I’m just going to take it a step further in that in your current role, the feedback you’re getting is around providing feedback to your team, which is one managerial component. If you think about then operating at the C-suite level, you’re then managing at scale. And so, what I’m saying to you is see if you can get the experiences that will start teaching you how to manage at scale, because that is very different than having to give feedback to one individual team member or to work with a small team. It’s that tenfold, twentyfold, thirtyfold. I know you have kids, it’s like going from one to two to three to four kids, and you’re like, “Oh my goodness. This is different.”
CATHERINE: That makes sense because there are, I think, opportunities for me to do both in my current roles.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you think about everything we’ve talked about, what you want to do, you have choices around how you get there, but you’ve identified at the very least for now, you’ve identified one area that there seems to be a gap that would help position you better for what you want to do in the future. We still haven’t answered the how fast do you need to move. It’s up to you how fast as long as the opportunities are there. We’ve talked about do you need to have a 5-year plan, a 10-year plan, a 15-year plan, a 20-year plan?. I don’t know, maybe I took the easy way out as a coach and I said it’s up to you. With all that said, we talked about a lot, what are you left with or where are you now compared to where you were when we started this conversation?
CATHERINE: Our conversation has confirmed to me that I am on the right path, that I am thinking about the right experiences that I need being positioned on a team and that maybe things coming easily to me is not an indication that I need to move faster, it’s that I need to diversify. I also think with the absence of a clear role that doesn’t really exist yet, I’m thinking about two very traditional roles, a chief of staff role in a C-suite role. Am I bending myself for those roles or are those roles going to be bending closer to me?
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you think?
CATHERINE: I’m not really sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, earlier in the conversation, you told me you have a certain way of approaching things when you’re not sure. What happens to them on your to-do list?
CATHERINE: They get pushed off.
MURIEL WILKINS: Until when?
CATHERINE: Until I get more clarity on them and then all of a sudden, I click.
MURIEL WILKINS: How do you apply that here?
CATHERINE: I think that’s a fair point. I think I need to focus on these experiences, forget this how quickly, kind of what the future state is and make sure that I’m working every day towards this ultimate goal. It doesn’t matter if I become chief of staff in 2 years, 5 years, 10 years, 15 years, because it might not actually be a chief of staff role.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, here’s the thing. When you came out of college, did you think you were going to go to Davos before you turned 30?
CATHERINE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. By no means am I saying, “Hey, forget the goals. Don’t have goals.” All I’m suggesting and I don’t even know if I’m suggesting, I’m actually playing back what I think I hear you saying is, “Maybe I don’t need to be so crystal clear because I have faith and confidence that the right opportunity will come up for me. The one that’s right. Instead, let me focus my energy and my time on building these muscles so that whatever opportunity comes up, I will be ready for. I have a general idea of what it looks like. I know I want to lead. I know I want to lead big. I’m not a small player. I want to be a big player. I am ambitious. I don’t quite know what it looks like, so I’m going to let that sit and marinate for a little bit until the fog gets lifted. But in the meantime, I’m going to make sure that I’m dressed for the part and conditioned for the part, whatever way that part ends up looking like.”
CATHERINE: That is exactly what I need to do. Man, you’re good.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, you’re good. You’re good. That’s great. What’s one thing you’re going to do coming out of this conversation?
CATHERINE: I’m going to build a team and I’m going to start managing people and navigating that whole world. I’m going to keep up my network and make sure that the skills and the muscles that I’m flexing continue to make sense. I think if there’s a point where the muscles that I’m flexing don’t make sense to either me or those in my network who are positioned closer to where I want to be, that’s when it’s time for me to move on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely. That’s great. All right. Listen, I’m excited. I can’t wait to hear where you end up. I have a feeling it’s going to be someplace big and I’m really looking forward to seeing where that is.
CATHERINE: Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate it. I’m very excited. I think that’s why when I was on these walks with my newborn baby thinking about where I’m going to go next to my career, for me, it wasn’t until someone said to me, “You are a leader,” that I was like, “Oh, I am a leader.” It’s that inflection point. I appreciate this time with you because I never knew what changed in these leaders’ lives and how they really moved forward. I’ve seen people who have gone super fast and it was exactly where they needed to be. Then I’ve seen people who have gone super fast and then things are abruptly stopped. And so, I think if I transition from this mindset of timing and goals, while that is all the rage these days, and really focus on the experiences and the feelings, that I’m going to be able to get there probably faster than I could have if I was doing it the other way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Terrific. Thank you.
CATHERINE: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: At the start of our coaching meeting, Catherine, like a lot of ambitious high performers, wanted to know the exact steps to take to get to the next level, but just focusing on a plan is not all that she needs. Instead, it’s about readying herself for the next role by building the skills that she’s going to need while simultaneously positioning herself so that she’s open to the opportunities when they arise. All of that takes some planning for sure, but it also takes some flexibility and openness to what sometimes doesn’t go exactly according to plan and yet might be the biggest opportunity in her hand. That’s it for this episode. Next time on
Coaching Real Leaders
.
SPEAKER 3:
I got pulled back into the function to kind of really help kick over the organization again actually, because in terms of my history, I’ve been with this organization for 20 plus years. Somewhere along the line, I really became, how do I say, a very, very specialized person in the ecosystem of what this function supports.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’d like to dive deeper into these coaching sessions, join me and the rest of the
Coaching Real Leaders
community for live episode discussions at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge of your own, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. You can also find me on LinkedIn, on Twitter @MurielMWilkins or on Instagram @CoachMurielWilkins. Of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends. Subscribe and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Adapt My Leadership Style as My Team Grows?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Alex to protect his confidentiality. He’s been working in a sales driven retail sector for over a decade.
ALEX: So, I started at the bottom end, stuck with the same company for six years, slowly working my way up that food chain and ended up in a general sales manager role which, in our industry, is commonly the second person in command in any one division.
MURIEL WILKINS: A few years ago, Alex was given the opportunity to lead a division and he significantly increased its revenue. That success led him to take over an even bigger division about a year ago where he now holds an executive role. It involves a very different skill set than what helped him rise up the ranks in the first place.
ALEX: Almost all of the entry level positions in this industry are individual production based, commission based. What happens a lot is people get really good at earning for themselves, and the first typical one, two, three steps up the ladder of hierarchy are still individual production, just producing different results with different products, different people. And a big point of failure in our industry, or at least in my opinion in our industry, is when you get to the level when you’re a manager of people. But all up until then, you’ve been only responsible for your own production.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alex has had success on both levels in his career, as an individual contributor and also now as a leader of teams. But he’s wondering how he can keep scaling up that leadership and grow even more. I wanted to better understand how he’d made it happen so far. Let’s dive in. As you said, you started from the bottom and rose up, reminds me of that Drake song – “started from the bottom now we’re here,” right? So now you’re here.
ALEX: Yep. That’s my life story. That’s my life story.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s your life story. Okay. Now you’re here. What do you attribute to your rise and your success in your career so far?
ALEX: I feel like a big turning point for me was I took that role seriously about developing people around me and getting results through them. And was able to really slough off the, it’s about me and what I can do mentality that, in my own words just plagues the management in our industry. So, that was a big turning point for a younger guy, getting a shot at managing a small team to really spend most of my time investing in developing them rather than just what I could produce individually.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you made that shift in terms of going from an individual contributor to a people manager and that differentiating you? What were some of the things that you focused on that helped you make that shift effectively?
ALEX: I don’t know if I have a great answer to that. I remember a conversation with a mentor of mine that had been with me for those first two or three steps. He told me, “You have to think about the other person first, what you can get for them than just watch the byproduct for you.” And that was a tough thing for me to rationalize being in an industry that’s measured fiscally monthly on individual performance and try to think, “Man, if I work with this person and I see them really successful. I may not reap that benefit for a couple weeks, months, maybe several months.” That was a challenging thing for me, but that was one of the things I learned.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. That’s interesting you say that. I often think about, particularly in an industry like yours, where even being an individual contributor is very commission based. It’s sort of eat what you kill, right?
ALEX: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then you move to a people manager role as you did, and you think about the advice that your mentor gave you, and you really go from being the lone wolf, eat what you kill to becoming more of a gardener where you have to cultivate and wait, or a farmer and wait for the harvest, not knowing if it’s ever going to come, right?
ALEX: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it sounds like you were able to do that when you moved into managing this initial group. So, fast forward to now, how many people do you manage?
ALEX: So, in my division that I lead, I have 113 employees. They are not direct reports to me. I have five direct reports to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, it’s increased in complexity in terms of the number of people?
ALEX: Significantly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Significantly.
ALEX: Within those five direct reports, those are all separate departments with separate revenue streams that funnel up to the top. So, it’s definitely complex.
MURIEL WILKINS:
So, here we are. What is it that brings you here today? What is it that you wanted to work through?
ALEX: What I really want to spend time working through is I seem to hit this same roadblock over and over in this role, and I need to give you a little bit of background on the difference in my last very successful position on the one now that is going relatively successful, but I have a thirst to be more successful. So, in the last division, we doubled revenue and kept fixed costs and headcounts flat. And that was with a team of 50 and one brick and mortar building. So, I tell everyone that job, even though it’s the same job I have now is different, because I could touch every employee in 10 minutes and I could get involved with things at much higher frequency. So, the ability to just handle most everything with those people was part of it. In this division there’s no possibility to be everywhere at once. And so, I’ve got to manage through the direct reports, and I do consider myself a very effective delegator. I really have studied that.
But where I hit the roadblock and why I’m interested in talking is I really have a thirst for learning. And so, I like to be the best I can be in every area that I manage. The people that report to me are not necessarily as good as I am. And I do think it is my role to cultivate independent thinkers and doers as a more executive style role in this larger infrastructure company and with its complexity. But where I struggle is I can delegate it well, I can paint really clear targets, hold people accountable for their primary job responsibilities. But there’s a point in time where someone will say, “Let me get your input on this,” or, “How would you handle this?” And I do have a good amount of self-restraint to say, “Well, return the question with a question,” but it always ends up with me putting some layer or lens of my perception of how the problem should be solved, or how the results should be achieved.
And it detracts from their ability to operate independently and creates a real parasitic time situation for me, because then they spend most of their time learning my way rather than developing their way. And all the while, the catch-22 is if they did it my way, yes, we would achieve the results, but I would have to constantly be a part of that. And I can’t do that here and scale the business. It’s not possible.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I wish more people would come to that realization that you just came to, right? Which is, it’s impossible to scale the business if you are involved at that level. So, just to replay, just to make sure I’m grasping where you’re at right now. You are now leading a more complex organization. Not only has it grown in size in terms of the number of people, but even physically it’s a little bit more complex to handle. So, it’s difficult for you to try to have that hands on approach that potentially you had in the past. And even though you effectively delegate, what you’re finding is that your direct reports or some of the people on your team are still coming to you to seek guidance, and inevitably it leads to you providing your perspective, which tends to weigh on them heavily. Is that right?
ALEX: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
ALEX: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, your hope is that you can get to a place where they can come up with their own solutions and act independently. So, that they’re not overly reliant on you and it frees you up to do more of whatever it is that you feel you need to do.
ALEX: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, let’s pick it up from there. If this was not happening, if they were not coming and asking for guidance, what do you envision you would be doing? What would that be replaced with?
ALEX: I would be doing a lot of, probably relationship building with just all the staff, but then also vendor partners, and then doing things that are going to help us scale, like recruiting or marketing our business to customers and employees. And then obviously measuring and passing results and targets.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And how much of that are you doing now?
ALEX: I’d say a fair amount. It’s not as much as I’d like to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
ALEX: There’s a big opportunity for people in my role to get in front of some new recruits and career path people, and really build relationships and develop them. And I’m not able to do that because I am pretty parasitically drawn to part of production.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m asking that question because I think it’s important to understand and commit to what would replace the time that’s now being spent with your team. If not, you just end up in a void and you just keep doing what you’ve been doing, right? So, you have a clear sense of how you would be spending that time. I mean, it’s very concrete. You could even calendar it in, right? So, that you know what you’re headed to. So, let’s explore what’s happening now. What do you think is getting in the way of some of the folks you’re dealing with independently coming up with solutions?
ALEX: I think the first thing that comes to mind is I am always willing to listen and help. I may not always be available, but I will make time later or schedule time to help them. I think the second thing that’s probably causing that not to happen is, I don’t know, maybe I haven’t specifically said, “Hey, kind of doctrine of completed staff work style. You need to have this idea put together before you ask for my opinion.” Maybe I haven’t cast that well. But other than that, I don’t what’s getting in the way of them doing that. I could say also just maybe, like I said in the beginning, most people are individual producers and the individual producers become people managers. And maybe they’re thinking to narrow like, “Okay. What do I do?” One of my direct reports has 40 employees of a zone. I mean, you don’t necessarily have to be a part of most of that at that level. So, maybe it’s some training, or some education as to where what I’m counting on them to do or not do.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Alex, I feel like you’re coming up with your own answer, right?
ALEX: I felt that way. I felt that way. It’s because of your good question.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s because of the question. Hey, I always ask the question. I often don’t know the answer, but I like your answers, right? What you reflected here is when you said, “Maybe I haven’t said or cast that well, that I need them to come.” So, the first is, have you set the expectation that that’s what you want them to do, right? And then the second thing that you mentioned is, I can’t remember the exact wording, but basically like, are they capable of doing it? Do they have the skill to be able to come up with these solutions and present them to you in a way that then you can get into problem solving? And then there’s a third layer that I would add which is, do they want to do that, right? Which is what we call commitment. Let’s take a pause here. It’s clear to me that Alex understands what he wants from his team. He has some thoughts on how to approach them, but he’s feeling unsure about whether it’s the right approach, and he’s looking for me to give him the answer. While I could do that, my sense is that what will help him in the long run is to provide some framing to his thought process. A series of questions that will enable him to coach himself through these types of situations. And the first thing for him to consider are his expectations, because so many times we expect certain results from others and yet we’ve never told them what we expect. I was curious if that was the case with Alex and his direct reports. Let’s pick the conversation back up as I explore this with him. Nobody else can set the expectation but you as the leader. So, what is the expectation that you have or have not set as it regards to ultimately enabling them to be more independent in driving to solutions?
ALEX: That’s a really good question. I feel like I’ve done a very good job of letting everyone know where their level of empowerment lies. I would say with some confidence that everyone knows what is a permission item and what’s a forgiveness item. I feel like I have not done a very good job of maybe asking or really clarifying when you have a roadblock on your plan, or on the way to achieving the results we’re counting on you to achieve. You need to touch these people or references and come to me with some potential solutions, maybe that is what I need to work through.
MURIEL WILKINS: And let me push that a little further. Let’s say I’m one of your employees and you’re now giving me that expectation. What would that look like for you? How do you think I can present it in a way that would be most effective for the exchange that needs to happen?
ALEX: Well, I don’t know if I could formalize that so quickly on the spot, but just casually, I would say something to the effect of, “I hear you have a problem. Who have you spoken to about this already? What material have you searched through? Have you looked at historical decisions like this and how they’ve gone?” And then I would probably say, “If the answer were no to one or all of those, so let’s work on this together now. But next time I’m going to be counting on you to make sure you’ve really vetted out everything you can possibly do before you tag me into the problem. Always willing to help, but I want to make sure we use the resources that you have first.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when I asked you that it was just for you to start getting some practice in terms, what’s the template that you can set to underlie the expectation that you’re going to ask around them being able to come to you with potential solutions? I mean, what you’re really asking for is that you want, I’ve heard this term used by one of my former client’s bosses when he was struggling with the same thing except the direct report he had was my client. And what he said was, “I need him to be a problem solver not an issue spotter,” and the issue spotter are the ones who are great at raising their hands and saying, “There’s an issue. There’s an issue. There’s an issue,” without necessarily saying, “Oh, and I’ve also thought about here are the three different ways that we could deal with this issue.” And what I’m coming to you with, Alex, is three options for you to react to rather than putting the onus on you to actually come up with the solution. Okay? Do you get the differentiation there?
ALEX: Yeah. That made a lot of sense. I just wrote that down, a problem solver, not an issue spotter.
MURIEL WILKINS: But in your role, what would be really helpful is to help them understand what that looks like in real time. So, it would be helpful to you to really clarify, think about past situations that you’ve been in where one of your direct reports has come to workshop a problem. What would’ve made that situation more helpful, more conducive to get to a place where they’re using you to really react and get to the final end point rather than necessarily process through the whole thing?
ALEX: So, what you’re suggesting is have, whatever process, but just have some type of fundamental I can template onto everybody, “Hey, when you have a problem, come with X, Y, Z,” and that’s just my thing I always ask for.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you can come up with a framework that is going to help make those discussions more productive on both ends. And what I mean by that is I’m going back to the goals that you articulated in terms of, if this was in place, if this was not a roadblock, what would be happening? And what you said is it would free up your time. You can deal with the higher level executive stuff you have to deal with, and it would continue to build your direct reports capacity to lead at the level at which they’re at without overly relying on you. So, there’s basically scale being built on both ends. So, whatever you come up with has to benefit on both ends.
ALEX: I understand.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s not just for your benefit. And when I use the term framework, framework is really a guideline. It’s like you’ve got to stick to this all the time, but it gives them some guardrails which support the expectation that you have.
ALEX: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, the first level is expectations, then we go to this next piece that you brought up, which is around what is their capability of doing this, right? What’s the skill level that they have? When you look across your direct reports, how do you assess the level of skill and capability that they have currently to operate at the problem solving level that you’re expecting?
ALEX: I don’t know. I don’t have a good answer to how to assess that. I mean, I suppose being more cognizant of how and when they approach me with problems. Is it very early on? Is it a little bit later? That’s probably a good measurement, but I’d probably lean on your expertise to help me work through that.
MURIEL WILKINS: When I coach someone, it’s not only about asking questions, sometimes it’s also about giving them a structure that they can use to think through their situation more concretely. That way they’re picking up a tool that they can use in the future and they don’t have to recreate the wheel each and every time. In Alex’s case, he keeps asking for my answer or my expertise as he calls it, but I’m not here to be an expert on his people. He knows his people. What I can do is give him a little training within the coaching conversation. I realized that teaching Alex a little bit about the situational leadership framework and how he can apply it to his team would be really helpful to him. Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard created the situational leadership framework quite a while back, but in my opinion, it still stands a test of time. And so, I use it here to help Alex structure his approach. Let’s jump back in now to look deeper at the expectations he has for his team and how realistic they are. The question in of itself is something also that you need to pay attention to and anything that you’re expecting of your leaders, right? What is your assessment of where they are right now from a capability standpoint? Why? Because if you have an expectation and their capability doesn’t match that expectation, something’s got to change. Either their skill level needs to go up or your expectation needs to go down, right? Because when there’s a gap between the two, that’s where the frustration will ensue on both ends. So, we’ve already calibrated what your expectation is. Now you’ve got to look at their skill level and say, “Is it even realistic that they can meet that expectation? How do you do that?” The first is, have they ever done this before? Not maybe exactly that, but do you have any line of sight in terms of experience that they’ve had in the past that gives you some evidence that they should be capable of doing what you’re asking them to do? And again, doesn’t have to be exact, it can be analogous.
ALEX: Right. So, can I ask a clarifying question on that? I want to go a little deeper on that. So, back to how most people end up in these roles is from being successful in individual production. As you were saying that, I was thinking about the direct reports I have and what they’re capable of doing. And I feel very strongly that all of them are the best of the best at everything their direct reports do. Maybe the capability is in actually the people management side and that I don’t know how to identify, “Have you done this before?” And what if the answer is no?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, the first is an assessment of what they have done, right? And in what way does it relate to what you’re expecting of them? And it doesn’t mean if they haven’t done it, that it’s like, “Oh my gosh, we’re done,” right? Doesn’t mean that at all. It just is one data point so that you can know what the baseline is. And if they haven’t done it, then that’s what we then call, it’s an untested area. We don’t know if they’ve done it or not, okay? We don’t know yet. And so, you now have to provide opportunity for them to be able to flex their muscle in that particular area. So, let’s say one of them is in problem solving, you’re not giving them the opportunity to even test out and grow in that area if you’re swooping in and doing it for them, right? And you’re not even swooping in, they’re pulling you in. And so, again, number one, have they done it? Yes. No. No? Okay. Untested. Now I’ve got to give them an opportunity. How do I do that? Next time they come to me and say, “This is something I’m working through.” Goes back to what you said earlier, you might need to not be so willing, not because you don’t care, but for the sake of their growth and their development to be able to say, “I’m happy to help, but not yet. I would like you to do this on your own.” How does that land with you?
ALEX: It feels very unfamiliar.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
ALEX: Yeah. It feels, yeah, like 20 grit sandpaper. Very rough. I understand try not to do too much and let them have a chance to try it on their own and encourage them to do that and stay out of it. Maybe somebody comes to me and says, “Hey, I’ve got this issue,” and they are more capable and they say, “Here’s a couple ways I’m thinking of solving this. What’s your opinion?” And we volley back and forth, and I encourage them to talk out which one they’re in favor of and then support that, right? So, I don’t just give them what I would do, I just help them like you’re helping me evaluate their decisions and they come to the conclusion. What would happen if I know that that’s not going to be a fruitful way of doing that? How would I handle that? I’ll give you a real world example. There is a direct report of mine who has an excellent track record, was with me at the other division. I’ve seen him grow and develop. He definitely is committed, very capable. He is asking me to help him with solving a problem for the first time he’s encountered it, and that is terminating an employee. He’s never had to do that, but we’re at the point where he is got to do that, and he has pulled me into that, “I really feel like you should be here. I got to have you involved in this.” And putting HR formalities aside, we have other people who could be there with him, but he has no experience doing that. And that’s a pretty high stakes problem to solve wrong. So, how do I help them in really high stake situations like that by staying out of it? Do I put a resource with them that’s an expert but it’s not me? Or do I do the first one thing, whatever it is, may not be terminating employee as serious as that, but do I do a little bit of it with them? Help me understand that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Once again, I think you’re coming up with your own answers, right? I think there’s a gradient. It’s never going to be black or white. The critical thing that you said here though that I think you can hold is, how high are the stakes? Meaning, how risky is this decision we’re about to make? So, as the leader of that organization, you are also the manager of risk. Okay?
ALEX: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you can ascertain or discern or make a judgment call around what are the issues relative to risk that really warrant your involvement versus those where you can back off a little bit. So, that then you feel that you’re creating development opportunities for them, learning opportunities for them where, if things go wrong, yeah, it might hurt a little bit, but it ain’t that bad. But only you can make that discernment, and so you have to assess it. And I think what we’re coming up with is criteria for you to determine how involved you should be. One of them is, how capable is the person? The second is situational, what are the stakes of this situation? What’s the level of risk associated with it? Well, the higher the level of risk and the lower the skill of the individual, the more of Alex we need.
ALEX: Right. But something where the risk and skill are matched maybe just untested, but the risk and skill are matched, let them try it out.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Why not?
ALEX: If it goes wrong, it may sting, but it’s not going to sting for super long. And that’s the judgment call I have to make.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. Because if not, what you’re creating is a term that we call learned helplessness, right? I don’t know if you’re familiar with that term.
ALEX: I’m not until just now.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you think it means?
ALEX: Yeah. Exactly what the two words mean is I’m teaching them to go on about their day, and when they need something, come get me and I’ll do it for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. I mean, how does that serve you, ALEX, in any way?
ALEX: It really doesn’t except for it creates a lot of unexpected upward delegation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
ALEX: And takes me out of doing important things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. What’s interesting to me is that that model worked for you in the past because as you said, the scope was smaller. It’s probably where you drew a lot of your own cell value in terms of what you brought to the table to your team. But now as your organization has grown, you’re realizing, “Oh my gosh, what used to be comfortable is now uncomfortable because it’s keeping me from adding value,” right? So, what was a value add before potentially now is a value drainer for you. So, it’s not to say that you never help your people, that’s not what we’re saying at all. It just means that it looks different. And as much as you have to level up, they need to level up as well.
ALEX: I understand that. I really understand that. May I bounce the situation off of you that occurred recently? I’m listening to what you’re saying and I feel like maybe the process I already understand, I just am not executing it at a high level every time. I had a direct report and his direct report, there’s a couple layers of management in that area, have an issue with an employee that I would consider high risk if they were to resign. A key player, a player, and they approached me and said, “We know that we need to restore the trust in this relationship with this individual. It’s broken. We need to keep him on the team and we need to do it in a way that works for him and us. Can you help us understand how we would, some best practices to do that with this individual?” We set up a time, and I walk them through some good questions to ask themselves before going into that discussion. Help them learn just in general through my experiences, when people take things super seriously and when they don’t, what does that language look like? What’s the setting look like? And then said, “Well, why don’t you all let me know when you’re going to do that and then let me know how it went.” And I feel like reflecting on that situation, I did a pretty good job of assessing, “Hey, this is a pretty high risk situation. These two individuals happen to also be very capable.” So, they really don’t need me to do it. They may just need me to help them think through it. Is that where you were going with that practice?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I think it’s where you’re going. Because what you just articulated there is you didn’t delegate fully and you weren’t super directive. You didn’t tell them, “Well, here are the three things I need you to do.” What you did is you coached them as a manager, not coach like how I coach. But you basically were using coaching skills as a manager by asking them questions, by helping them process through it until they could come up with their own answer, and potentially you weigh in on that answer. And so again, we can go back to this is very situational, right? There is no one check the box, this is what I do every single time. Are they confident to be able to complete the task? And do they have a willingness, how motivated are they to complete the task? And depending where they are on either of those two levers is how you then approach them as a manager. So, if they are highly capable and highly committed, what do you think you can do?
ALEX: Just help them come to their own conclusion.
MURIEL WILKINS: You just delegate it, right?
ALEX: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: If they are low capability, so low skill, but have a level of commitment, right? What do you think you need to do?
ALEX: Probably teach them the skills or work with them to raise their skill level.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. So, you will be more directive. And then anything in between, you are being supportive and/or you are coaching, and coaching is what you described in that situation. So, for you, what you need to be able to do consistently is assess, assess, assess. And depending on what you’re assessing, that’s how you approach it rather than having a one size fits all in terms of your approach.
ALEX: That makes good sense. We’ve talked a lot about capability. What about the situation where someone’s capable but not committed?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what about that?
ALEX: How would you work with someone like that? I’ve faced that situation recently where it’s, “Hey, I have this person and there’s an issue and I just want to just let them go.” Because there’s so much apathy, and they know they could coach through and work with them. How do I get them to that level? Is that expectation setting?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s work through that, right? So, this falls in the realm of being more coaching them and being supportive. And so, what is it that’s causing them to not be committed?
ALEX: I don’t know. I would venture to say they just do not want to deal with it because it’s a problem. I don’t think I asked enough questions.
MURIEL WILKINS: What made you not ask those questions?
ALEX: What made me not ask those questions? Just quite frankly is this person very rarely even comes to me for assistance with anything and performs at a high level. And my reflecting, which you are doing a phenomenal job of making me do, I think what was going through my mind is, “Out of my five direct reports, this person is the least of my efforts and they perform at a high level. They could just be having a bad day. Let me just handle this for them.” Maybe doing them a favor is what was coming through my mind rather than probing a little deeper.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what’s your goal with your people?
ALEX: I want to provide them with skill and experience and meet with time.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, all I would ask is, is your action and we can look at that particular situation aligned with the goal.
ALEX: Probably not. Actually, definitely not.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s not a right or wrong, or a good or bad, right? It’s just alignment. There’s nothing wrong with doing somebody a favor, but I think there were a lot of assumptions baked into that. So, I’d say the first thing is check your assumptions. I think the question that you said like, why don’t you want to call this person? What’s going on? What are you concerned about? So that you could understand what’s at the root of what you are seeing or interpreting as potential lack of commitment. If you don’t understand what’s at the root of it, it’s very hard to try to motivate the person. You don’t know what you’re motivating. So, again, it’s not black or white. You’re literally having to discern and make a judgment call all along the way. What I want you to be aware of though is the actions that you can take in service of growing and developing your people, which is your ultimate goal, so that it can also create some leverage for you is the action that you’re then taking. What’s the action that you’re taking that’s most aligned with that?
ALEX: So, back to just assess, assess, assess?
MURIEL WILKINS: You mentioned, “Well, what happens if somebody is just not committed at all?” You’ve tried to understand what motivates them, you’ve tried to motivate them and you just can’t get at it, right? Or on the flip side, the skill, you’ve tried to teach the skill, you’ve sent them to training, you’ve provided all the resources so that they can build the skill, and that skill is just not being built. Then you have a decision to make. Is that person sitting in the right seat on the bus? Because that also is your responsibility.
ALEX: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like when your kids choose a sport, and then you’re watching them play that sport and you’re like, “Oh my god. Not the right sport for them,” right? Or an instrument. At some point it’s like, maybe the interest needs to lie somewhere else.
ALEX: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Unless they enjoy it. They’re highly motivated, that’s great, but that’s only going to get them so far. Just like skill is going to get you but so far you also have to have the motivation. That’s what you want to be constantly looking for over the long term. So far in our coaching conversation, Alex has made it very clear what his problem is and how he’s been thinking about it. He’s motivated to do better, not just at delegating, but at really scaling up his leadership. And we’ve talked through some specific scenarios as to times when he’s swooped in to handle something, instead of prodding someone he manages a bit deeper and guiding them into finding their answers themselves. It’s a classic move that leaders need to make to learn to level up, to shift away from directly solving problems themselves. But as with any new muscle you need to build, there’s some discomfort. To lead sustainably, he’ll need to use this muscle on repeat rather than do it once and think he’s done. But if he’s not careful, he could let the discomfort get in the way. Let me ask you this, because when we first started talking about this, and I think I said, “Oh, you need to have these conversations,” it was a specific conversation and you said, “Yeah. That feels like,” I forget what you called it, but like sandpaper, it felt rough or uncomfortable. What was uncomfortable about it?
ALEX: What’s uncomfortable is hearing you say this, when I think about capable and committed, I already am capable and I’m already committed enough to do this. I just simply haven’t been doing it. And when you said that, that’s what felt rough to me is, Wow, I have known this all along and simply have not practiced self-discipline or enough restraint to execute at a high level.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you say that it means that you have certain expectations of yourself.
ALEX: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: That you should have done this. You’re learning, you said you’re thirsty to learn and grow. And so, there is no, I should have known this, if you’re a learner. And one of the things that you can model to your team members is what it looks like to be a leader who’s committed to learning and growing, because that’s what you’re hoping they’re doing. If what you model instead is that you already have the answer and you should know the answer, what do you think is going to happen?
ALEX: They’re going to come to me for the answer every time.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what is happening?
ALEX: Exactly that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly.
ALEX: Yeah. That’s funny. You said earlier expectations have to match. What did you say? Your expectations have to match?
MURIEL WILKINS: I said a lot of things, I don’t know.
ALEX: Yeah. You said your expectations have to match what they’re able to do based on their level of capability and commitment, I think is what you said, right? I hear a lot of people say to me, “Your expectations are too high. Your expectations are too high.” And I have those expectations for myself that are super high, like you just said. And I think that’s a good takeaway for me is really assess that gap. Because they’re part of the reason we’re here today is the frustration that’s coming from that gap.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Okay. And frustration, you might have heard me say this other times, frustration always comes from the gap between what you expect and the reality of what’s happening. And until you can come to terms with both, unless you are very well managed, frustration ensues. Now, does that mean you just have to have low standards for your people? Or just say, “Oh, well it is what it is, this is how they’re going to be.” No, right? You want to see them for where they are. You have to accept the skill level at which they’re at, so that then you can decide what to do. It’s not just so that you can say, “Oh, well that’s where they’re at,” right? It’s so that then you can decide what to do. You have to see it for what it is. Okay? And so, that’s one piece and that’s what’s happening presently. And at the same time as the leader, you have to hold the belief of what they’re capable of in the future, and that’s their potential. So, where there is a risk of you getting really frustrated is expecting them to be fulfilling their future potential today. That’s what we call magical thinking. Okay?
ALEX: I do a lot of magical thinking.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Don’t we all. Don’t we all.
ALEX: That’s exact issue. Where my frustration lies is I expect everybody to hold themselves to the high standards I have for myself. And so, then I cast that on them. And most people are just not… can’t think that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: My sense is, Alex, that you probably want to see yourself as a leader who inspires not intimidates, right?
ALEX: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t get the sense from you that you intimidate in terms of your demeanor or your tone, but your knowledge might be so intimidating. Your ability to have the answer might be unconsciously intimidating to people that they would rather come to you to the answer than risk coming to you not knowing. And so, what do you think you could do that would make others feel more comfortable coming to you not knowing exactly what the answer is, but willing to take a risk that they will suggest a solution?
ALEX: That’s a great way to put that. I’ve never thought about it that way, but that is exactly what is occurring is people are coming to me because I’m such a wealth of knowledge. They are so afraid to think anything other than what I’ve already thought. And I think to answer your question, maybe leading by example, like you said, and being maybe more visible about I’m working on, or I’m learning, or I don’t know everything is important. Maybe encouraging them that I’d rather see them learn on their own than come to me with the answer. And if there’s a rough journey to get there, that’s okay. I’ll be with them on the journey. But I’d rather them learn for themselves, and just really make that apparent to them that I’m not grading you on your decision if you do not know, I’ll be grading you on your level of commitment to learn.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, what you’re talking about, Alex, is two things, okay? One is you want to be explicit about creating some safety for them to learn, which is almost the same as safety for them to fail. And so ,what are the conditions that you can put in place, or what are the things you can say, what are the actions you can take that create an environment, a culture of safety for real learning to happen? Because real learning doesn’t happen without mistakes, real learning doesn’t happen without some missteps, some backsliding, et cetera. So, that’s one, and you have to think about that from a cultural standpoint, what it is that you’re doing in your organization. I think the second thing is at an individual level when you said, “Hey, I need to lead by example.” And so, the question for you is, How do you demonstrate to your people day in, day out that you also are a learner – that you don’t have everything figured out all the time? And I think that’s really a personal thing because even here on this call, when we hit that one little piece where you were like, “That’s uncomfortable.” And I said, “What’s uncomfortable?” And you’re like, “I should have known that. I should have done it.” Well, you didn’t, you’re a learner. And so, getting comfortable with not knowing something or not doing something is your path that actually demonstrates that you’re learning. And the more you can demonstrate that to your people, the more they’re going to realize, “Oh wow, here’s a guy I look up to. If he’s willing to learn, maybe I can do that too.”
ALEX: I understand.
MURIEL WILKINS: You understand and? I hear a little hesitation.
ALEX: No. I still have that, I should have done it in the back of my mind. But you’re exactly right, I’ve got to start looking inside and providing myself with a little bit of grace, and then be open about and vulnerable enough to express that so people feel more comfortable doing that around me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, Alex, I think if you can actually, rather than starting practicing that on your employees. If you can start practicing that on yourself, like treat yourself the way that we just talked about you should treat your employees, you will have a much higher chance of being able to do it out there with them. Okay? You’re going to have a really hard time cutting them some slack, extending them a little bit of grace when they don’t necessarily meet the “expectation” if you’re not able to do it with yourself. And just because you cut yourself some slack does not mean you’re not holding yourself up to high expectations. The two are not mutually exclusive. It’s, I hold myself up and I hold my team up to high expectations, and I support the fact that they’re learning. It’s both.
ALEX: That makes a tremendous amount of sense to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you this. What is one thing that you are walking away with from this conversation that you think you can start implementing immediately?
ALEX: I think the most important thing I can start working on as a learner is the last thing that you just said, and that’s getting comfortable being a learner myself first. But the thing I could implement right now is starting to look at the reason we’re on this call today through the lens of, do expectations match capability and commitment? And out of those three, if they’re not all in alignment, where is the misalignment? And then attack it from that angle. That’s something I feel comfortable doing. I have to do it using that lens. And I will, beginning today.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. You haven’t been using it yet.
ALEX: Yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you’re going to start today. All right?
ALEX: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Terrific. Well, listen, thank you. Thank you so much. I look forward to hearing how all of this goes for you.
ALEX: I appreciate it. Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: When it comes to scaling your leadership, it’s not just about the number of people you’re overseeing, or how much revenue you’re responsible for, or the processes you put in place. Those are the concrete things. But scaling leadership is really about scaling others, helping them build their capacity. Because if they can’t take it to the next level, neither will you. For Alex, he’s been so used to figuring things out for his team that it’ll take a real change and approach for them to start figuring it out on their own. But he enabled the dynamic, so he has to take ownership and responsibility in helping them get there, and build a team culture where being a proactive problem solver is the norm. By leveling up his own leadership, he’ll role model to his team how they can do the same. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
EPISODE 5 GUEST: As a senior leader, I become disillusioned with an organization when I see the executive leaders not demonstrating the values of the organization, not living the values, not applying the values.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with our leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season, apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Move from a Specialist to a General Leadership Role?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest, who we’ll call Krish to protect his confidentiality, is part of the finance team at a large global company. He recently got promoted to vice president and he’s proven to be pretty valuable at this company, running a team with dozens of people spread around the globe.
KRISH: Within the company that I’m working for, I support a very specific function of finance that supports the business on a day-to-day basis. It’s one of the critical thesis of the engagement with business, because it does define the performance of the business ultimately. It’s a high visibility role. I kind of lead the transformation of the organization along with the day to day execution of the function as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: But Krish is also struggling because he thinks he’s only being viewed as a subject matter expert, even though he feels he has a lot of other ways he can add value. In fact, a few years ago, he left the company looking for new opportunities that would allow him to spread his wings, but when the company faced certain challenges during COVID, they called for Krish’s specialized skills, and so he returned.
KRISH: And that essentially was when I got pulled back into the function to kind of really help take over the organization again, actually. I’ve been with this organization for twenty-plus years. Somewhere along the line, I really became, how do I say a very, very specialized person in the ecosystem of what this function supports.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now, Krish is wondering how to make it clear that while he’s valued for his area of expertise, he can also add value to the company in other ways, not just as a subject matter expert. Let’s jump into the conversation as I ask him about how he became so specialized in the first place.
KRISH: One, I think I like data. I’m a very curious person when you share data to me and because of the volumes and volumes of transactions that we typically engage with, given the size and scale that we engage with, I always got fascinated trying to make connections between data points. And that led me to understanding what you do here, what you do here. So, over the years, I’ve really built that understanding in a very, very holistic manner of the changes that can happen and what the impact of the changes are, and what are the kind of both financially, operationally, all of the elements of it, both internal, external. Pretty much I kind of became so, so specialized in this area that I not just created a name for myself, a legacy for myself, but I also built a huge network of people who I can always go to and say, “Can you kind of go look into this one?” And they would always do it because they have in some way or form seen me come to them in the past, either for a question or for an answer. They can absolutely feel comfortable coming to me if they have a question and I feel comfortable going to them if I had a question, even if the question was a very hard to… If it prompted an answer, which is not the answer which people wanted to hear. And so, that’s how I became so kind of really specialized in this one, in this specific function. And so, when things kind of got a little bit out of control, I got pulled back into this one and I essentially kind of moved away from that three years ago, like I said, and I walked back into the role in terms of supporting and making sure we can stabilize what was really happening in the ground actually. Transformation part of this comes in terms of the way it gets done today. But a lot of what I just said happens very manually. Big companies do have a lot of major processes. So, this is a process which is huge in how much pool of dollars that we manage, but very, very manual, extremely localized, very fragmented, very manual. And part of the reaction from the board of directors, from the executive leadership team is, “how could have we operated this way?” And people did not pay as much critical attention to it because everything was going okay. And when it broke the way it broke, everybody said, “How could we have really done it this way?” And that’s where the transformation opportunity came. And we committed investments to really kind of go address some of the fundamental aspects of how we manage, but we also kind of learned to be, vision to go further step up, to kind of really move to more like a machine language capabilities, artificial intelligence capabilities to help ourselves. That’s where the transmission. And so, when I came back, clearly, I didn’t want to do the same, what I did three years ago. So, the part of the kind of motivation for me to really look at it as an opportunity was the transformation opportunity.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, it sounds like you’ve sort of built your career or have built a reputation in this very specialized area that supports your business. It has led to creating a name for yourself within the company, as well as a network. And more recently, you were promoted into a role where you will continue to leverage that specialized knowledge and at the same time increase your scope by being responsible, but for other areas such as the transformation as well.
KRISH: Exactly right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. So, you’re now here. And so, what is it that is challenging you at the moment? Why are we sitting together?
KRISH: It’s a gift and a curse in some ways. How I say it, a curse is a strong word. The career which I built in this company is largely driven by the opportunities I’ve gotten in this specific area. So, like I said, I built a name for myself. There is name recognition across so many levels for me in this company and for all the good reasons as well. So, my career has propelled in some ways or formed by what I have achieved in this specific area. But it’s also got to a place where it defines me as a person in terms of what I bring to the table. So, anytime you have a breakdown in once in either the [inaudible 00:07:25] or somewhere around the corner or core of it, I get dragged right into it even if I try to move away at points of my career with the company. So, there have been moments when I’ve made choices and said, “You know what? I’m going to do something else in my life.” Because in some ways I was almost thinking myself, am I kind of doing this to myself or are others doing this to me? Because you don’t really know whether you are creating the problem for yourself or you’re… So, am I trying to just build a problem for myself by not really leveraging all the opportunities that is there available for me? And so that’s why I went to Harvard Business School because I really want to broaden my perspectives, which I think was hugely beneficial. If I kind of go back in my background, I came from a very, very small little village where in south of India where you almost know everybody in the village. There were three streets in the village. That’s all it was. So, I never, ever thought I would ever go to a school like Harvard to kind of develop myself. So, I was really thrilled about the opportunity and of course for the first week or so, I felt so out of place because I was completely overwhelmed by just the sheer place actually. But thankfully again, what I got there is to get more perspectives and really kind of open my eyes in terms of how you could look at things, what you think of opportunities in terms of addressing business problems. So, clearly those have been hugely helpful. So, I took the break, but then, like I said, when something goes wrong, you get dragged right back in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, let me just pause here, because I don’t want to lose sight of the paradox that you’ve raised in terms of it’s a gift and it’s a curse. So, and what we’re talking about here is this subject matter expertise and specialization that you’ve built over your twenty-year career at this company. So, you’ve articulated how it’s a gift in terms of it creating a name for you, as well as your network. How does it manifest itself as a curse?
KRISH: Which is kind of what I mean by it’s a strong word, but the way I say it is… It’s almost defined me as a person, which is kind of basically saying, I’ve almost kind of got associated myself only with one specialized theory of what people think you tend to offer. And that is where I kind of say it’s a bit of a curse because I genuinely kind of would think, “Yeah, there is a lot more I could offer.” It’s not just that one field or scope of area that I would offer. And like I said, that’s why I try to go out and do other things just so that I can almost kind of, not just prove because thankfully I have enough name in the company. I don’t have to necessarily prove, but to demonstrate that there could be other places where you can go.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, in a way, is it that you feel like it has limited opportunities for you because you’re so strongly identified with this one area?
KRISH: That is one aspect of it. The other aspect of it is, like I said, along the way I have gained so much knowledge, it comes back to me as an individual. And I’ve struggled myself to find somebody who can replace me.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right.
KRISH: Because that’s where the first part of it comes because you are almost the person to go to when something comes up in that area. And all the years, I’ve tried spending time identifying people, working with people, but I haven’t got to that person who I think essentially takes over. And again, I have the same feedback from the management leadership team as well. You’ve got to find that person who can basically replace you, which is essentially what I have struggled for as well. Now, again, like I said, it’s given all the gifts to me, but how do I kind of get out of this wheel, which I’m spinning all the time. And that’s essentially where I’m looking for help.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s take a pause here. What Krish is experiencing, this feeling of being pigeonholed into a particular role in spite of his other skills, is one that many face as a result of their success. And like in this case, it often becomes a catch 22. I want to move on, but I can’t find anyone to replace me. But it’s important that we kick the tire on the obstacle that Krish thinks is getting in the way of reaching his goal, so that’s where we pick the conversation back up. So, let’s start with, you mentioned that there’s two pieces to it. One is if you were able to break out of this strong identification with the role, it might open up other opportunities.
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So, it’s who you’re defined as a leader. And then secondly, part of what has also kept you in this role definition is you haven’t really been able to find somebody who could step in, in lieu of you or as a proxy for you. Right? And so, the question that also becomes interesting is, are you waiting for that person to step in before you can define who you are over and beyond this subject matter expertise? But we’ll explore that. Let’s just hold that for a second.
KRISH: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you: you mentioned that you have been trying to find somebody. What has gotten in the way?
KRISH: Like I said, data has always been a passion for me, so I could go down to the most granular level to understand the problem. And I could also transition to maybe making the presentation to the CEO of the company, CFO of the company, kind of really demonstrating what the issue that we have. I’ve been lucky enough to kind of do the transition across the whole channel of this area that I’m operating. Go down to the most bottom level or most granular level, but also be able to articulate the problem, the challenges, the solution to the most senior levels of the company, including CEO, CFO, and everybody. So, when you think of it, I’m looking for people and that’s the expectation I’ve set for the role myself. And that’s the expectation I believe probably people are looking for as well. Who can really do the same, offer the same level of scope in terms of what they deal with – go down to and explain what happens at the most granular level, but also be able to go represent, stand up and have this dialogue with the senior most management of the company.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
KRISH: And that is where I’ve struggled in terms of finding the set of skills in people who can transition this range of what they need to offer in terms of what people expect.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I mean, it sounds to me like you struggled with meeting one area of the formula, and you keep chasing that area in that you stated that these are the expectations that you have created for the role.
KRISH: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, the expectation of somebody who can do the data part, but who can also communicate at a high level internally and externally, right? So, it sounds like that’s the holy trinity of what creates this role in the way that you execute on it, and that’s the expectation that you’ve set. And when you’ve gone out and looked for people like that, nobody fits it. Right?
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if that hasn’t worked and you keep going down that track and you’ve really put an effort in finding that person, the other area that you might want to examine are your expectations.
KRISH: Mm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And are the expectations that you’ve set not really grounded in what is actually needed for the role, rather than what you desire for the role?
KRISH: Yeah. That is interesting. I’ve had the same question myself because like I said, three years ago, when I did that part of the role, that was one of the biggest transition challenge for the leader who took over from me at that point of time. And we kind of got to a similar place three years later. And that’s where I kind of stepped back in actually. Because in some ways, like I said, I almost walked away from it not wanting to go there and I intentionally – right or wrong – I intentionally stayed away from helping the person make that leap or kind of do the similar offering, what I was offering. If I’m just kind of calling myself as a product or a service, I’m saying, can the leader offer be the same as what I was offering? And I see that way because I didn’t want to model it the same way how I did. And my goal was will people reset the expectation because now that I walked away, can people reset the expectation themselves? And here I am three years later – I’m back to the same place actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, but here’s the thing. I think you’re the one who’s been the expert in this area. So, I don’t think you should be waiting for others to reset the expectation. I think you need to reset the expectation. You know the role best. So, the question becomes, is there any other way that this role can be fulfilled, that builds on what you’ve done, that leverages what you’ve done, but doesn’t have to exactly – be exactly what you do. Right? So, that’s one. And then secondly, it sounds to me like you are sort of seeing things as one end of the spectrum to the other. It’s either you’re all in and it has to be done exactly the way you’ve done it and you’re the only one who can do it, or you’re all out, and let the people fly and let them figure out how to do it. And my question is, is there something that’s in the middle?
KRISH: I think that’s probably what I should think about because… and would you then suggest that I take the lead in defining that expectation and kind of guiding through that expectation?
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know. What do you think?
KRISH: I think so. For my own good, I think so, because, like I said, I don’t want to keep spinning the same view. I genuinely want to do something different, and I also want to set somebody else for successful. Because maybe that’s something which I didn’t do well enough last time maybe. If I think over it now, maybe I should have probably played a more active role in setting the successor who took over my role in a better way. Because like you said, I kind of almost did all in or all out, either I’m in or out. And that probably was not probably the right way for how I should have thought about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think my suggestion really is that you do something different than what you’ve already tried.
KRISH: Yeah. No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, if it’s that middle ground that you haven’t tried yet, then it’s that middle ground. I also think a lot of people, when they think about roles and expectations and you ask them to describe the role, they end up personalizing it too much. Right? So, they describe the expectations and describe the role either as a mirror to the very effective person that’s in it, or if that person is ineffective, as the total opposite, then the person who’s in it. Right? And I think, in your shoes, when you have to try to redefine or define what this role is and set expectations, I think you need to depersonalize it. So, I think the question is not, who can do the role like Krish has done so well, and what did he do? The question really is, what does the business need from this role? And therefore, what are the criteria that we need to look for in an individual to fit that role?
KRISH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? And let’s not also lose sight that it has taken you twenty years to build this level of expertise. Right?
KRISH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: And to build the network and to build the trust with the higher levels’ leaders in your organization. And so, there’s also a question of, is it even viable to find one person who can fit all those things?
KRISH: Yeah. No, I agree.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it could be. It could be. I’m just mirroring the fact that you said you’ve tried to find it and you haven’t, so therefore…
KRISH: No, very true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Either.
KRISH: Yeah. Again, like I said, I’ve tried it maybe two, three times and I probably failed… in like they say, the classic case of the insanity definition, doing the same thing again and again and trying for a different outcome. And it’s probably what I was trying again and again, actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
KRISH: Yeah. And to be fair, and like I said, I did go seek for opportunities myself because my curiosity led to places where others don’t typically go. And part of my curiosity also has been, I’ve gone there, tried to understand things, like I said, both internal, external perspective, which I’ve been very lucky. And it’s almost like when I came into the company initial years, I was almost like a sponge. I was absorbing so much in this space that it just stuck with me for so long, and that kind of played a benefit in terms of the knowledge. But over the years, what I did on top of the knowledge is really building the network, which kind of became the almost intellectual property of mine, which is essentially what it’s turned out to be. Right? And maybe it’s also a question which I should be asking myself and probably posting it to who I engage with to say, is this even possible? Do we need to think of the role being really managed differently as well, with different people, with different skillsets and what they can bring?
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that that’s the exact question, and it becomes business need-driven rather than a reaction to what you’ve done in the past.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes we can let the stone get in the way of climbing the mountain. Meaning, we let the short term problem get in the way of dealing with the bigger challenge ahead. In Krish’s case, it was difficult for him to see past the issue of finding his replacement. So, it was important that we unpack that first, before we move on to dealing with his reputation as an expert. He’s clearly gained a lot of influence at the company as a deep subject matter expert, but his aspirations are far more than that role and he needs some help getting there. To figure that out he has to start by defining what it is that he wants. Let’s dive back in.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m going to ask you this.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re very clear about how you’re being defined right now, what your reputation is. What is it that you would like to be known for if it’s not this?
KRISH: So, I would like to be known as a leader who can bring organizational transformation, take big problems and solve them and also bring teams together. Those are the three ways of how I would think of what if I were to advertise what I bring to the table. That’s probably the three things I would advertise.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
KRISH: Now within that, there are definitely capabilities and skills that I bring – like data, for example. That’s a skill set. That’s not an offering that you do. That’s a skillset that you bring and same way, how you engage with people is a skillset that you bring. And those are skills that I have really helped myself develop over the years. And my curiosity is almost like something which is always there and need to just go seek answers in these ways.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you were known for these three things that you named, right – organizational transformation, problem, solving, bringing teams together – what difference would that make for you? What difference would that make in terms of your opportunities? Just what difference would it make?
KRISH: In terms of opportunities, clearly, I would probably have the opportunity to think about roles in supporting business outside of the one area, which I’m supporting. In a broader prospect. Let’s say, even just owning the profit and loss for deliverable outcome for a business unit. And that’s not… So, I support a global function today. And can I just go look at one geography and say, would I want to be the finance leader for that one geography, rather than just doing a global kind of role for one area, which I have so specialized on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
KRISH: And then same way, just one business function. Can I do the similar role for one business function or can I take over a business function, which either has a long term goal to change the way it operates. And can I kind of support the business in executing that strategy of whatever they’re having. That is the opportunity, which I think it would create for me if I kind of move away from this legacy, what I have for myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so the way that you would like to be seen and positioned for the company, to what extent do you feel you currently are demonstrating any of those three areas?
KRISH: So, I think on the part consistent with what the expectation is for this organization, I think I’m demonstrating across all three. Now, does that make people think that I can only do in those three? That’s the part I get stuck with. Or maybe let me say, am I framing what I offer or what I bring to the table in the three base of how I laid it out? Or am I framing what I bring to the table again, in the context of that specialized area? I think that’s probably where maybe I may have framed it exclusive to that specific area. And that’s probably where I’ve got myself stuck in this, if I were to call this a rat hole, actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: There you go. But guess what? You’re digging yourself out right before me. I can see it. Right? And so, it’s the framing.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s not a matter of capabilities. It’s really around, how are you presenting yourself to others? And if you’re constantly presenting yourself really being reactive to where people are putting you, then yeah, that’s how you’re going to show up. Versus what you just said, which is, what if I framed, even in my current position – what if I leveled up and, or I even addressed other business issues and reframed the way that I present myself? So, what would that look like for you?
KRISH: Clearly, I think in terms of just the opportunities itself, you are generalizing what you can deliver or what you can bring, which is a good thing. And because most opportunities as you think about it are essentially around these three areas, most opportunities. Clearly, you want to support your business to deliver their business goals. And clearly, every big organization has a core goal of bringing teams together, and solving complex problems is always there as a fundamental expectation for everybody actually. So, I clearly think people would appreciate what I can bring to the table in light of what I’m achieving here as a proof point for what I could offer rather than basically… Because of the way maybe I’m framing it, people tend to associate it only that I can do it in this place. Which maybe, it’s probably me who’s saying I’m doing it, but I’m doing it here, rather than me, myself, not telling here is what I bring and these things could equally be applicable in other places where you have a similar requirement in terms of what needs to be done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So, I think what you’re doing, if I can use a metaphor, I think it’s a metaphor, is instead of positioning yourself as an athlete, you’re positioning yourself as a basketball player.
KRISH: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? And you are like, “But I can play baseball and I can play football and I can play soccer and I can play tennis.”
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you keep going out in the world and telling people you’re a great basketball player, right?
KRISH: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, the question becomes, how do you present yourself as an athlete?
KRISH: Yeah. Now in terms of, and this is… I’m going to probably bring this out because this has come up. So, there have been peers of mine who have said, “Here is an opportunity for you to go pursue.” And there are times when I would’ve gone back and told them, “Ah, I’m not really sure I’m going to be able to do that job.” Now I’m thinking it’s almost like a self-fulfilling prophecy I’ve created for myself. But I’ve said, “You know what? I’m only going to do that work because I’m only good at that,” when people, others would’ve come and told me, which means probably even peers would’ve come back and told me, “Oh, maybe you should try it.” And now I’m thinking twice on.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Krish, right? You are being perceived exactly the way you’re presenting yourself.
KRISH: No, very true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? So, and you came into this conversation focused on like, “how can other people see me differently?” And I think really it’s how do you see you differently? Right? And back to the sports metaphor, not only are you… What you just shared with me is you’re getting invited to play baseball, right?
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because people think you can, and you’re saying, “No, no, no, no, no. I’m still a basketball player.” Right?
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think the exercise for you is truly about honing in on, how do you define the value that you bring to the table? That’s number one. And you have framed it in those three areas that we talked about. And then secondly, really important, how do you demonstrate it? To whom? Where? And in what situations? Because if the only place you demonstrate it in is in this little area – not little area, this area that you have specialized in – those are the only people who are going to see it. If you want to see it transferable to other areas, then you’ve got to move from playing basketball to playing baseball and bring it over there.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now here’s the good news. You have built, it sounds like from what you’ve shared, an incredible network.
KRISH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Across the company. That’s like your practice field, because I think what would be worthwhile for you is to actually do some outreach, almost some promotion for yourself around how you can be positioned. Right? You now need to go tell people that you’re a multifaceted athlete.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s an asset that a lot of people don’t have. It’s like, “Okay, now I know, but who do I tell?” You actually have people to tell.
KRISH: Yes. And again, like I said, I have been lucky and grateful for what I have built. Now, in terms of the promotion, this is another. Again, just given my cultural way of how I grew up. This is why I used to even when a peer comes and tells me, “You should try,” I’m almost kind of hesitating myself. Am I even kind of going to try it? Should I even try it in terms of what is being offered actually? So, in terms of this promotion, I probably need to have to force myself to do it because it’s definitely not going to come naturally for me, just given my way of how I approach it, but definitely something which I should think about.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, the word promotion conjures up a lot of like, it’s a bad thing. So let’s just put that to the side, right?
KRISH: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You framed it as just trying it. And look, Krish, it wouldn’t be the first time you tried something. I mean, what you shared about your story of growing up in a very rural area and then getting to where you are in your career and being able to attend top educational institutions… you’ve used the word quite a bit over our conversation around being lucky. That’s not just luck.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you attribute it to?
KRISH: I think I’ve had some great mentors. And like I said, my curiosity has allowed me to really build on certain things, which I never thought I could build on. And mentors have been a huge part of my career. And I’m sure along the way, I’ve got a lot of luck as well. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think that curiosity is what can lead you to exploring other opportunities. Right? Be curious about them…
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: …since that’s what you’ve grounded yourself – as something that has led to a lot of your success, and mentors are great. All those things are a great combination. You have great mentors, you have curiosity and the will to follow through on it. You have luck as you put it. But I’m going to tell you, those three things are great, but without effort it doesn’t amount to where you’ve gotten in your career. So, I think leverage all those three things and recognize that you also have a track record of putting the effort in and of dealing with situations which, at first, might seem overwhelming. That’s what you described your situation was when you went to business school.
KRISH: Oh, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That it was at first overwhelming and then you made it through. Right? And so, such as the life of different career opportunities. Right? So, I don’t think it’s so much about promotion, even though I’m the one who used that word. I think it really is about being curious and having the confidence that you can leverage everything that you’ve been great at in getting you to where you are and translate it to other roles.
KRISH: Yeah. Like I said, it was more for me to look inside than outside actually. I was looking outside all the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: All the time, all the time. Right?
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think where we are is, you really have to work this parallel path of identifying someone or, dare I say, others, right? It might be more than one person to be able to start building and fulfilling the role that you’re in so that it fills the need, so that’s sort of drawing something in. And at the same time, you have to take this definition of who you think you are, who you believe you are and the value you think you can bring to the table over and beyond being a subject matter expert in this area and start actually walking that walk.
KRISH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: In the way you speak, in the opportunities you put yourself forth on, in what you share with your mentors and your sponsors and your network to start saying, “Yes, I can do this.” Right? “Let me know if there are other area ways I can be of service.” And I think if you walk both of those in parallel, then you might start seeing the transformation that you want to see. So, what are you going to… Let’s get real concrete here. So, as a result of this conversation, what are you going to do?
KRISH: Like you said, probably first, I’m going to kind of define the role in terms of what really needs to be done on that role. And for that I’m probably going to go have dialogues with my business partners, stakeholders, internal, external, to really, what do they think that role entails actually? And how do we kind of then think about the way we can set up somebody for that role? How can we make somebody successful in the role? And if that kind of really also means me working with the set of individuals who can ultimately take up that role, that should also be part of the play. That not just define the role, get feedback in terms of defining the role, both internal, external in terms of… And also set the expectation, what that role should really be as well. And in the process, identify people, folks who are well talented as, or more talented than I am to kind of make sure they will see the role, the opportunity in the role, and then kind of set them up for that role if they want to pursue, if that fits in their view of what they want to do in their careers. So, that is task number one, if I were to call it as one of the work streams that I need to work to. And then the second one is just going back and reflecting on myself in terms of who am I? What do I really represent in terms of what I bring as well as what I’m capable of? And also what I want to do as well, because in some ways maybe I’m kind of happy with where I am, but I also want to complain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think that you are very clear on what you no longer want to do.
KRISH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you haven’t been clear about what you want to do.
KRISH: Yeah, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s very difficult to move on… [crosstalk 00:38:30]
KRISH: Yeah, when I’m not letting go myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: … to what you want to do if you’re not letting go of the current situation.
KRISH: Yeah. No, I absolutely understand that now, which is great. So, first I have to go back and do the reflection on myself, and then as I think about it, also use my network peers –leaders – to kind of really go back and have those dialogues with them. Also, offer up what I can do if there is an opportunity, and kind of actively seek the opportunity rather than wait for it. Offer what you can do rather than somebody coming and knocking on your shoulder and saying, “Why don’t you do that for me?”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. All right. Very good. Thank you so much for sharing.
KRISH: No, thank you. This is super helpful for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: As you map out your career strategy, it’s not enough to declare that you want to be a leader. At some point, you need to determine what type of leader you want to be. In Krish’s case, he had to decide whether he wanted to be an expert leader or more of a generalist leader. One is not better than the other, but the approach you focus on significantly informs what opportunities you pursue, how you go about your work, and even how you communicate. Without that focus, you will have a reputation, but it may not necessarily align with your aspirations. The key is figuring out what you want to do, and then thinking about how to reposition yourself to get there. That’s it for this episode, next time on
Coaching Real Leader
s…
SPEAKER 4: It kind of makes me feel that I’m losing their trust because when you’re the person that is supposed to help them, but you’re actually not knowledgeable enough for their work… Yeah, it’s kind of a challenge for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you – our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’d like to dive deeper into these coaching sessions, join me and the rest of the Coaching Real Leaders community for live episode discussions at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. And if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. For HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Do I Overcome My Disillusionment with the Executive Team?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a long time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting, focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Michael to protect his confidentiality, he’s been in his current leadership role for several years, helping to support a number of teams across a diverse region.
MICHAEL: How I approached the role that I’m in today is really by demonstrating a desire, a willingness to develop within the organizations that I’ve worked for. So, I’m very much a people-centric leader and I feel like that’s really helped me in my journey, that I have an appreciation and a real respect for the team that does the work every day, and that’s really helped me in my career today.
MURIEL WILKINS: Michael works hard to ensure that his teams deliver on the targets set by the company every year and are continuously improving. He believes he’s found effectiveness in this role because of his leadership style.
MICHAEL: I’m able to relate to all levels within the organization. I enjoy spending time on the floor, engaging with the team, understanding their challenges and their frustrations, and then being able to provide solutions and input to that to make their job better and more rewarding, and to really foster the team environment. And when I look at the leadership models, the one that really aligns with my beliefs is really a servant-leader approach, and really being able to be there as a servant for those team members and to really help them be the best that they can be.
MURIEL WILKINS: While it sounds like much is going well for Michael with his teams, he reached out because he’s been struggling with what’s happening with the senior leadership team above him. And so, I started by asking him to elaborate on his situation.
MICHAEL: Through my working career, one thread that I’ve noticed is that as a senior leader, I become disillusioned with an organization when I see the executive leaders not demonstrating the values of the organization, not living the values, not applying the values. And what that causes is a loss of performance, my performance, and my commitment to the organization in support of the current and the future goals. It impacts my brand because I start to lose the motivation to really commit medium- to long-term to the organization, and it makes me a less effective leader. And what I’m really hoping that we can get out of today’s session is strategies that I can apply when I’m faced in similar situations in the future. They can ensure that I don’t lose that brand awareness or that acknowledgement from executive teams, that I’m someone that’s supported for the future and that my commitment and my drive to do the job to the best of my ability continues.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what I hear you saying is that when you start feeling like the way the senior leadership team is acting is not aligned with the company values that they’re espousing, it causes you to become demotivated. And as a result, it impacts your performance and then potentially as a result of that, the way you’re perceived by that senior team?
MICHAEL: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I want to unpack that a little bit, because there’s a lot there. It was like a mouthful for me to say. Right? There’s a lot of different layers. So, help me understand where the… You used a word, getting disillusioned. Help me understand where the disillusionment comes from. What are you disillusioned about?
MICHAEL: Disillusionment comes about from, I feel like I am supporting, I’m living, I’m modeling the way when it comes to bringing the values to life in the organization. And then when I see the executive team doing the opposite of that, where they don’t demonstrate the commitment to the values and sometimes they do aspects that are contrary to the values, that’s where the disillusionment comes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MICHAEL: And I feel sometimes that what I tend to do, is I project my standards. So, I have a high bar of expectation within myself and the way that I demonstrate my performance and my behavior in workplace. And at times, I feel like I’m projecting that same standard onto the executive team but I shouldn’t really have to because that executive team is actually more senior than I am. And I feel as though they should be the ones that should be setting the standard or the bar higher.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, where did that expectation come from, that because they’re more senior than you, they should set the bar higher?
MICHAEL: Well, I think it comes back from the start of my working career, where as a supervisor looking up to a manager or a manager looking up to a general manager, a general manager looking up to a regional manager. So, always looking at the more senior person as being a person that needs to have a higher level of standards and a higher level of behavior that really inspires people, that becomes almost a motivational aspect of what the person can work towards.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And so, you have an expectation around that, those who are more senior, who hold the highest leadership positions in the organization behave and act in a particular way. At a standard, as you put it, that’s even higher than the one that you set for yourself. Right?
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s your assumption, your belief of what should be happening.
MICHAEL: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how is that expectation, or holding that assumption and that belief, working out for you?
MICHAEL: Well, most of the time that doesn’t work out well for me because I see an incongruence there. And that starts me on the cycle of becoming disillusioned with the organization. I would say, however, there have been senior leaders, more executive leaders that I’ve worked with in the past, that really have been inspiring and have set up a high standard that I’ve been able to learn and I’ve been able to develop from. But that type of leader is very few and far between.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, in what you’re sharing, I’m almost feeling like there’s a… “If so, then that,” type of formula. Right? Like if the senior leader is a servant leader or operates at a high standard according to the organizational values, is that model leader that quite frankly we all wish we had, right? Then, you perform at the level that you know can perform at, at the highest level. Second scenario is, if the leader is one that is not the model leader citizen and does not walk the talk when it comes to the corporate values, then you end up becoming disillusioned and unmotivated. Are those the two scenarios?
MICHAEL: Correct. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes, okay. And so, what would it look like if you had a senior leader who did not walk the talk, and you still performed at a high level? Is that even a possibility?
MICHAEL: It is. So, what that would look like would be, maybe becoming a more senior leader in the eyes of others through my demonstration of values, in comparison to theirs. So, maybe that’s the opportunity to raise my standards, but to able to be seen as someone who is performing at a higher level, who has the opportunity to go further within the organization, that is a more senior leader that models the way based on a commitment to the values of the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And so, let’s speak in a little bit more concrete terms. Give me an example, to the extent that you can, give me an example of a situation where you felt so impacted that it caused you to go down the disillusionment route.
MICHAEL: A situation that happened recently with… The business had put pressure on the team to take their funds and use those as a way of being able to provide for their families over a short period of time whilst the business was going through a challenging period. Instead of being able to provide an opportunity for that team to be able to continue their employment for that short period of time, and not have to draw from their retirement fund just to be able to survive on a daily basis. And those conversations that were had really cemented to me that the senior leaders were not living the values of the organization. That they weren’t providing the care and the responsibility for the team, but rather they were just focused on the short term outcomes to be able to deliver the monthly and the quarterly results.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, they were focused on the short-term outcomes.
MICHAEL: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: You assessed that that’s not really living up to the values of the organization, they’re not doing the right thing. Right? Quote-unquote.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, as a result of that, how did it impact you?
MICHAEL: The impact on myself was really a drop in performance, a drop in commitment, a poor attitude towards the organization in its strategic view and its direction. And although I was doing the basics, the fundamentals within my role, I wasn’t, sort of, doing anything over and above that. So, in some ways, I was going through the motions of my role and not actually performing at a standard or an expectation that I would have of myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how did that make you feel?
MICHAEL: It made me feel a bit disappointed in myself. And I reflected a lot on how I got to that particular point. And in some ways, I would justify it through the actions of the executive team and what they did substantiates my behavior, my lack of performance, my lack of drive and commitment to the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what they did, did this to you?
MICHAEL: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Where’s your choice in all of this?
MICHAEL: My choice is that I don’t need to allow those types of events or actions to impact on who I am and the role that I play. And my performance should be to my standards, to my expectations, and not deflect on the actions of other people that results in a loss of performance overall.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, it’s so interesting to me Michael, because you have eloquently articulated the misalignment that you see between senior leaders in your organization and who they espouse to be, in terms of the values that they have set, or the corporate values, right? So, you see this misalignment happen and as a result, what happens is you misalign. You end up in a place of misalignment between yourself and the leader that you want to be. And so, you’ve created, and I’m going to say created, this causality. Almost this rule of as long as the top leaders are aligned with the corporate values, then I will be aligned, right-
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: … with high performance. But if you see your leaders don’t align with the corporate values, then I’m not going to align with performing. And I mean, that’s one way of doing it. But I think if that way of doing it was satisfactory for you, you wouldn’t be here, right? You wouldn’t experience the disappointment that you’ve had. Okay? So, I think the question that we need to start with is, how do you want to show up as a leader consistently? Regardless of what’s happening?
MICHAEL: I want to show up as a leader that lives the values of the organization, that demonstrates the commitment to the people and that brings his best every day into the workplace. That ensures that I meet my expectations, my standards, and my performance isn’t impacted by other people’s decisions or actions.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what would make that possible for you to do that on most days, that’s within your control?
MICHAEL: That’s an interesting question. I think the thing that might help me in achieving that outcome is being clear as to the purpose that I play within organization, the reason my role exists, the values that I bring and I feel to the standards. So, being clear on my standards, and being able to ensure that I’m consistently meeting those standards. And if anything, improving on those standards so that my brand and my reputation is continually improving, it’s not staying the same or it’s not regressing back. So, I think being clear on the standards is certainly an important part.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think you just came up with your own framework, right? Which is, “I need to understand and have clarity around why I’m here in leading.” Number one. Number two, “What are the values that I lead by?” And number three, “What are my operating standards?” Okay? The way that I do things? And checking yourself, whether it’s good times or bad times, how aligned are you to those three things? You know, it’s really easy to stay aligned to what’s happening from a corporate perspective when everything’s going well. When everybody’s doing what they’re supposed to be doing and behaving the way they’re supposed to be doing, super easy to do. But then the real question is, what happens when the storm hits? When it starts pouring, when it’s raining and things aren’t as clear or, quote-unquote, nice? What do you hold onto? A hard truth that many of my coaching clients end up having to come to terms with is just how much is out of their control, especially when it comes to their coworkers. That reality becomes even more visible in situations where you need to manage up. Whether that’s a small disagreement or a bigger values issue that arises between you and more senior leaders, the fact remains the same. The only person’s behavior who we can really control is our own, but before we can really change our response, it helps to look at how we’re approaching the issue in the first place. In Michael’s case, he’s used the word disillusionment several times in our conversation, which intrigued me because in order to become disillusioned, an illusion has to exist, so I was curious what exactly was the illusion Michael was holding onto?
MICHAEL: I think the illusion that I’ve been carrying is that senior executive leaders are operating at a higher standard, a higher level of value expectations than other leaders in the organization, and that senior and executive leaders should model the way in being able to bring the values to life. But to also be the role models, the mentors, to other managers within the organization as to the standards that we’re working towards, that we’re trying to attain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, maybe we can rename that as being an aspiration, but it’s not reality all the time.
MICHAEL: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s reality sometimes, but it’s not reality all the time. Believe me. If it was reality all the time, I would be out of a job. Right? I would not exist in this profession, okay? So, the illusion is that it’s there all the time. That’s your illusion number one. Should you expect it? Absolutely. It’s an aspiration, but you also want to hold the reality that it doesn’t happen all the time. So, then what? I think the second illusion, if I may offer one, is if you have this unwritten rule of the way the senior leaders behave dictates how Michael behaves and how Michael performs. And so, inherent in that illusion is where’s Michael the leader? Where’s your voice? What do you stand for? And so, I think part of this path is being able to anchor yourself in who you are as a leader and only you can define that. Do you feel like you have a definition of what that is for you?
MICHAEL: I do. I feel like for me, the definition of who I am as a leader is that senior leader that really provides support and motivation and guidance through the teams. That really looks to continuous improvement as a way of being able to improve myself but then to also help improve the teams. And this is where I think… Because continuous improvement is part of my role and it’s certainly part of who I am as a person, wanting to be able to develop and learn how I can become more effective and a more impactful senior leader is really what helps drive me to continue to be better in the job that I do today and into the future. So, I feel like I’ve got a good sense of who I am and what I want to work towards. However, I do need to go back to your points of understanding that why. The values and the operating system to be able to deliver on those outcomes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, look, I think that, clearly, you’re somebody who’s committed to growth, right? Growth for yourself, growth for your people. And I think that’s probably what causes the rub with the senior people. You’re not seeing them growing in a way that’s more aligned with the aspirational leader. It doesn’t feel like you’re getting continuous improvement from the top. And so, I think the question is, can you still be this continuous improvement leader, the leader who’s committed to growth and development in spite of those senior leaders not demonstrating the same attributes? Do you think it’s possible to be that type of leader within the construct that you’re in?
MICHAEL: I think I can be, and I think I need to be. Because the organization that I’m in today might not be too dissimilar to an organization that I’m part of the future. Being able to focus on the factors that are under my control, the way that I show up to work every day, the performance that I deliver and the way that I demonstrate the values and the commitment to the organization is certainly something that I can influence and ensure that I consistently apply that. And I would like to be able to improve the way that I do that tomorrow and next week and next month, and make sure that I am that role model that potentially, I’m looking for those senior leaders to be. So, part of this, maybe what I need to do, is I need to model the way and not be influenced by the senior leaders that are within the organizations that aren’t meeting the expectations that I feel they should be, or the standards that they’re delivering, and actually be that role model that shows that Michael’s the right person.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You know, one of my favorite quotes is by Gandhi that said, “Be the…” I think it said, “Be the change that you want to see in the world.” So, for you, you can learn by contrast. And what you’re learning is by contrast. You’re seeing these leaders and you’re like, “Oh, that is not the way that I think leadership should happen.” And then you have a choice. You can follow suit, you can do something different, or you can just do nothing. Just not pay attention to it. And what’s most important for you to not lose yourself, because the disappointment that you’ve experienced is really the disappointment in yourself. I mean, you had disappointment towards them but you’re also disappointed in yourself, that it impacted you. And so, this notion of you really, Michael, asking yourself, “How can I model the behavior that I think, or the leadership that I think is going to be most effective for my team? How can I do that, even if others are not?” Is what’s critical here. So, what would get in the way of you being able to start doing that, right after this coaching meeting?
MICHAEL: I don’t think there’s anything that can get in the way. I think I’m responsible for how I show up in the workplace and the way that I communicate and deliver on performance and expectations. So, there are no barriers that prevent me from doing that and part of this is to… Considering how I change my mindset when it comes to these situations. So, that going forward, I don’t become that leader that becomes disillusioned and uncommitted and a poor performer. But rather, I become that person that rises above, demonstrates the values and becomes that role model, that person that people can aspire to become.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I’m going to come back to this word that you keep on using, which is disillusionment, right? Because I think that that’s the practice for you. That is part of when this happens for you again. The question that you can ask yourself when you notice it’s happening, because I’m assuming you notice when you start feeling disillusioned, do you?
MICHAEL: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I should check that with you. How do you recognize that you’re in that place?
MICHAEL: I feel it. I reflect on it and it feels like, “Here we go again.” This is a feeling I’ve had before. Different organizations, different situations but I recognize it when it happens.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so I love that you said… Well, I’m saying I love that you said, you probably don’t love that it happens but that you’re like, Here we go again. Okay? Whenever you hear here you go again, that is a sign. You are caught up. You are caught up in the cyclone. And so, the question is, do you want to break that pattern that you’ve been in, or do you want to stay in it? There are a couple of things that can break the pattern. The context, right? You can get out of the situation, get out of the cyclones way, and you break the pattern momentarily. You can try to change the others, meaning change the senior leadership team, and that breaks the pattern. But good luck with that in the short term. And the third option to break the pattern, is for you to do something differently. To respond to the situation differently. You already know what happens if you do nothing. You get into this cycle of disillusionment, disappointment, lower performance, impacts your brand. You’ve seen, you’ve shared with me, that movie play over and over and over again. So, now we want a different ending, and so what’s the new ending that you want for this movie?
MICHAEL: The new ending would be a continuation of my strong performance and my strong commitments and a focus on controlling the controllables in the role that I play within the organization. And to also be able to differentiate myself, so that if the other senior leaders are not living the values and not performing to the standards that I believe that they should be, that I am, and that separates me in a good way.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, that’s your starting point. You have to have a good sense of what you want the outcome to be. Which is why we’ve talked about, well, what’s the type of leader you want to be? In order to then be able to dial it back and say, “Okay, well then how do I even need to see the situation?” And so, whenever you start feeling this disillusionment, I think the place for you to start is, “Well, what’s the illusion that I’m reacting to?” And so, you have to be able to separate what’s the illusion versus what’s the reality of things? And the reality of it at that moment, is these leaders are making decisions that really are not aligned with the corporate values. That’s it. It’s happening whether I like it or not, whether it’s fair or not. So, you see it for what it is, and then you respond. Then you make a decision. How do I want to respond to this situation?
MICHAEL: I think that’s a good change of perspective. And I think that that disillusionment piece is critical because it is what I perceive it to be. Be it right or be it wrong. And I need to just understand that it is what it is, that that is the situation. And potentially, the way that I perceive it doesn’t mean it to be correct either. It’s just my lens that I’m looking through but not being able to allow that to impact on me as a senior leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, whether it’s right or wrong, I mean, who’s here to say, right? But you can certainly make an assessment around you see what the corporate values are, you see how people are behaving. You can make an assessment as to whether it’s aligned or not. It’s as long as you’re seeing that clearly, rather than staying stuck in the how you think it should be. Because by staying stuck in the how you think it should be, it is paralyzing you from responding to the way that it actually is. That’s the difference. When you stay stuck in, this is how I think it should be, how these leaders should act, we already know how that turns out for you. You get discouraged, it disappoints you because it rubs against the very things that you deem as important. So, if we shift from what we would like it to be to this is what is actually happening, this is how it is now, whether I like it or not, then you can make a better assessment around how do you want to be, going through that? How do you want to lead during that time? So, it’s not really a matter of perception, it’s a matter of shifting from a place of how you would like it to be to a place of this is actually what it is. Let’s pause here because this is a critical juncture for Michael. His ability to step away from how he thinks upper management should act allows him to see more clearly what is actually happening right now. And this is key because it’s only when we have clarity and acceptance of what is happening in the here and now that we can make the choices of how to respond to the situation in front of us. Michael is so caught up in how he wants the senior leaders to behave and what they should be doing, that he was missing out on what he could be doing under these circumstances. With this concept in mind, I now wanted to work with Michael on how he could apply it in real time. Let’s say you run into a situation which happens often. It sounds like it happened to you, where your senior leadership is now mandating something for your team, so you’re now the one who has to go and implement this with your team. And from your standpoint, it’s not aligned with the corporate values. How are you going to deal with it?
MICHAEL: I think the way that I will deal with it will be to understand that the direction that’s come from the senior leaders, the decision or the direction that they believe is the right decision for the organization, and that my role within that decision is to be able to support what they’ve determined to be the right course of action. And to not negatively allow that to impact on my behavior and my performance. But rather, to be that senior leader that provides that input, that direction as required and focusing on the things that are under my control. And not allowing for a viewpoint or an illusion that is going to impact on me negatively and limit my performance and my behavior.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, we’ve been very focused on how you model this type of behavior, the leadership behavior that you espouse to your team. I’m sensing there’s a little bit around how you’re perceived by the senior leaders too, when you get into these situations, right? And so, talk to me a little bit about that, because you’ve mentioned being negatively perceived. What’s the negative perception that happens?
MICHAEL: The negative perception is when I believe that the senior leaders are not living up to the values of the organization, that I become withdrawn and I just go through the daily motions. I’m not doing anything additional within my role. And that is noticed by senior leaders because it’s almost as though I’ve withdrawn. I’ve tapped out as far as my involvement, my commitment. I’m not speaking up during meetings. And it’s almost this quiet withdrawal that happens, and I’m aware of it and the senior leaders are aware of it. They notice the change that happens in my demeanor and the way that I communicate in the workplace, and that fuels that cycle as well. It can be a very slippery slope, where I become a senior leader that’s committed to delivering the performance goals and objectives to the organization, to being a senior leader that will question into the medium to long term, as to whether I’m the right person for the job.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you go to that place of questioning whether you’re the right person for the job, where do you land?
MICHAEL: I land, in some context, in agreement. Because I question whether I actually want to be a part of the organization going forward, or do I actually want to go and work in another organization where I might find that group of senior leaders that do live the values. But what I’ve seen through my working career is that this has been a cycle. So, I go into an organization and I don’t see the senior leaders demonstrating the values and it just fuels the cycle of going, “Well, I’m disillusioned. I’m going to move on.” I’ll go move on to somewhere else, the first 12 months or two years is very good. A strong performer, potential promotion into more senior roles. But then if the senior leaders aren’t demonstrating those values, then the cycle starts again. Here we go again. That’s that. And it just becomes continuous. And that’s happened in my working career in the last 15 years. And when I reflect back on what’s the last 15 years look like? Well, the last 15 years has been in the senior leadership role. So, I’ve been in the middle management role in that period prior to the 15 years, and my expectation of my manager has been less than the senior leaders. So, I don’t have the same standards of expectations on the middle management level, than I do on the senior leadership level. And I think that’s fair. I think you should operate at a higher level when you’re at a senior level. But that hasn’t served me well. Because it’s impacted on my performance, it’s impacted on my attitude, and the way that I viewed the organization overall, and has resulted in me leaving the organization and working somewhere else. Which has good aspects, as well. Because it makes me a more diverse leader within the business. However, it’s almost though I’m searching. I’m searching for that senior leadership group that’s demonstrating the values on a consistent basis that fuels my commitment and my performance ongoing, which I don’t know if it actually exists.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know either.
MICHAEL: No, I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? I don’t know either because what you’re talking about is finding an environment and a leadership culture that you can work in, where there’s a strong enough intersection between what you value and what the leadership of the organization values. And I say an intersection, not an overlap. It doesn’t have to be completely overlapped. There has to be some intersection but it doesn’t have to be a hundred percent. And I think the tension you’ve been feeling is when there’s dissonance.
MICHAEL: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s no intersection at that point in time, between what you value as a leader and what it seems the organization’s leaders value, by the way that they’re behaving or acting. Okay? And in those moments of dissonance, which are going to happen, those are inevitable. It is inevitable that there’s going to be those moments of dissonance on a team, in an organization, in a relationship, in a friendship, you name it. The question is how far is the gap between your values and that of the organization? And how long does that gap and that dissonance last? And can you withstand being in that gap for that long amount of time? So, there’s a tolerance that only you can answer. Is it worth it to you? So, that’s why I say I don’t know, because I don’t know what that intersection looks like for you. But I think this question that’s coming up for you, this other question which is, “Is this the right place for me?” It could be, it could not be. Who knows? But the first place to start, I think, in breaking this cycle is first look at yourself, right? What have you contributed to this dynamic, to this pattern that you’ve seen for the past 15 years? Is there a different way of responding? And then test it out. Try it out. Because there’s growth there. If your response stays the same, what you think’s going to happen when you go to the next place?
MICHAEL: It’s the same outcome.
MURIEL WILKINS: The moment there’s going to be this inevitable dissonance, which there will be, it’s going to be the same outcome. So, this is not to… And I hope you’re not hearing it this way, I’m not absolving the senior leadership of your organization from… I wish they were in the room with us, right? So, I could be like, “What the heck’s going on?” Right? But they’re not here for the coaching, so I have to assume that things are just going to stay the same there. Maybe. Or it might be a season. But this is not to absolve them from what they need to do, clearly. Right? Yes, they ought to be acting in a more responsible way from a leadership standpoint. But in spite of that, there’s always this decision point that you have to come to. And so, while you’re there, what can you do until you decide, if you decide, that you don’t want to be there anymore?
MICHAEL: So, I think some of the things that I can do as a strategy going forward, is to be clear as to what role I play. The why of my position within the organization. And to ensure that from a values point of view, that I’m not going to compromise on my values but rather focus on those aspects that are under my control. Which is the way that I turn up day and the way that I perform. And really ensure that that operating model that I operate from, is one that does have integrity behind it in the fact that I’m actually putting into practice the things that I say are important. And if that means that I model the way, then that can be a positive thing. Because people will notice that and they will be able to recognize the fact that Michael’s raised above… Maybe the lesser behavior within the senior leaders, and is certainly that person that brings the values to life within the organization, regardless of what’s actually occurring.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
MICHAEL: And not allowing for that to impact on who I am ultimately, and my personal and also my professional brand.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, who you are is who you are. Right? And every day we have a choice to be anchored in what we stand for and what we believe to be true, or allow others or circumstances to dictate what that is. There’s a question for me, because again, you focused on how do you model the behavior? And you mentioned, even, sitting in these senior meetings and feeling yourself withdraw. Withdrawal is one response. I just want you to see what choices you have in front of you. What other choices do you have in how you could respond to the senior leaders when you see them not walking the talk? Besides withdrawal?
MICHAEL: Yeah. Well, the opposite is to speak up and to make my observations, my feelings, my thoughts known within that group. And to offer solutions, as well. To maybe offer a different point of view, a different lens that might help the organization to actually live the values, to demonstrate the values that might help, as well, the senior leaders to be able to ensure that there is congruence in what the organization espouses and what the senior leaders actually do. And that finding my voice has been a key point that has been raised in performance reviews and even on self-reflection, that I need to speak up more and not withdraw in, as opposed to what I’ve done in the past. And sometimes, I feel as though the reasons why I withdraw in is because I think, “What’s the point?” I don’t feel like I’m going to be able to influence or change this group of senior leaders. But that, once again, is potentially an illusion. That my mindset is that I won’t be able to do it, but I’ve never actually put it into practice.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, maybe we can test it out. Because again, I don’t know. Maybe they won’t listen to you, but maybe they will. But I’m going to tell you with certainty what will happen if you speak up, or if you test this out. It will be one situation where your actions have been aligned with what you think is important. Regardless of what the outcome is. So, I think this notion of speaking up… I didn’t even know this is where we were going to get to but the fact that you said it, right, is key. Because what you’re looking for is… Michael, you’re looking for congruency all around, right? You want to be congruent with your values and how you deal with your team, but you also want to be congruent with your values and how you deal with yourself and how you deal with upper management. It’s not enough to say, “Oh, I’m just going to be consistent with my values in one area of my workplace, but the other area, I’ll fake it till I make it. I’ll just withdraw out of self-preservation.” And so, if, for you, the response to date has been withdraw because, “Why should I say something? Because what… I mean, are they even going to listen? Let me not even bother.” Right? Which really underlies that, is a fear of what?
MICHAEL: Maybe there’s a fear that my view, my value, is not recognized within the senior leadership group. That my opinions don’t really matter and that the broader collective is more important, as opposed to an alternative view.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you got to the core of it. We started this conversation with you saying how people-centric you are, right? And people who are people-centric, what do they believe matters? People.
MICHAEL: People. It’s all about people.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, here you are in a position where you’re like, “What if we roll this whole thing out and at the end of the day, what I have to say doesn’t really matter? Because they don’t do it, they don’t act on it. And what does that say about me?” Michael, it says nothing about you. What it says is that what you had to say, they didn’t agree with. But it has nothing to say about you as the person that you are and the values that you stand by. So, I think a key piece for you is in what way do you act? What’s your responsibility to act according to your values? And is this response of withdrawing when you see something not being done that is quote-unquote right, how does that uphold your values by withdrawing in those situations? For me, it doesn’t matter. You can withdraw, you can speak up, you can do everything in between. The only thing I will ever ask you is, does that align with what you think is important for you and the outcome that you’re looking to drive to?
MICHAEL: Yeah, it doesn’t align with the values and the outcomes that I’m trying to align for. So, I think one of the key takeaways for me in this session is really about making sure that I’m clear on my values and the importance of speaking up, of having a voice on the issues, the alternatives that I see, and that I’m actually putting into practice what I believe are important aspects of being congruent in the workplace, when it comes to living the values.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
MICHAEL: And if that helps me become a more effective leader and someone that actually has a voice of value that can support the organization, then that’s always going to support me in whatever my future goals and ambitions are within the workplace. And it doesn’t matter what workplace that is. I think it’s a universal trait that I can apply that’s really going to help me in my future. So, thank you, Muriel.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re welcome. One of the things that always keeps me on my toes as a coach is how often the issue that we start with brings us to so many, and sometimes different and unexpected places, by the end of the discussion. Michael came to our coaching meeting feeling once again frustrated by his senior leadership team, and not knowing what to do about it. But by walking through his expectations and coming to terms with what he could and couldn’t control, and by thinking of other ways he could approach certain situations, Michael came out on the other side of the conversation with ways he could take action in a situation where he had, up until now, felt pretty hopeless. And as far as what’s to come for Michael? My sense is that as long as his actions stay aligned with his values, he won’t feel as disconnected as he has, and he’ll be able to really figure out whether his current, or any other future organization, is the right place for him. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: My health has certainly given me that shock to the system where I’m not willing, nor am I able, to keep the pace that I was able to do before. I’m worried that if I don’t have a long term strategy for figuring out how to approach the rest of my career, I’m going to be stuck in an environment that might not be sustainable.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From HBR presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Can I Build Credibility with My Team?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Yara to protect her confidentiality. She’s based in the middle east and recently changed careers. Her previous role felt a bit routine and she wanted a new challenge.
YARA: I was seeing all people getting into the software development and hearing a lot about software development and how it’s booming and how it’s that challenging industry, and I’m a person who really likes to be challenged. So, I applied for this job for master team lead role. I studied for the Agile Certified Practitioner. I got the certificate and I applied for the job. It’s something new to me. And I like it because there is a lot to it that I didn’t know about and it’s a whole new way of working.
MURIEL WILKINS: She chose to become a scrum master, in particular, because it felt more suited to her personality.
YARA: The scrum master has to be the one who’s removing impediments, who’s caring a lot for the team, always working to help the team reach their maximum efficiency, deliver the highest value and so on. I wanted the part of removing impediments, being the mother of the team and solving all their issues, all their blockers that they’re facing, help them get their work done very smoothly and actually protect them as well from any distractions outside the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: She’s been in the role for several months and she’s a bit overwhelmed with the learning curve she’s facing. Let’s start the conversation with me asking her more specifically about how it’s been going. So, how’s it been for you? How’s the first four months gone?
YARA: Pretty tough. I’m facing multiple challenges. One major challenge is that I lack on the technical knowledge. A scrum master doesn’t have to have this real technical knowledge, but when they’re discussing technical issues that I have to follow up on or some processes that I’m not familiar with, then this is a big challenge for me. And it kind of makes me feel that I’m losing their trust because when you’re the person that is supposed to help them, but you’re actually not knowledgeable enough for the work it’s kind of a challenge for me. And the second thing is that some people on the team are older than me and a scrum master is somehow a hidden managerial role or a team lead role. So, there is kind of this resistance.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s the question that you’re trying to answer for yourself?
YARA: I would like to have your advice on how to deal with those challenges and how can I have a leading voice. I’m trying my best to get that knowledge and gain that knowledge where I can help them, but until then, how can I have this leading role in the team and kind of enforce some processes that might bring a good change for the team? Like for now, some processes are not clear. And I’m trying to enforce new policies that might change their way of working, but again, I want it to go as smooth as possible without having so much obstacles and so much resistance.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you want to affect change and implement change, but you want to do it without any obstacles?
YARA: This sounds like-
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m just mirroring back what you said.
YARA: Yeah. But I don’t know if this is the right way to put it, but I want to do good things for the team. But at the same time, I’m facing a lot of challenges like trust issues and maybe resistance issues.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. It’s more around thinking about what your goal is. And what I’m hearing you say is you want to create some good, you want to implement some change in the process, and you want to do it in a way where it doesn’t really create any waves. That’s aspirational. That’s ideal. We all would love that. Okay? And at the same time, I think, I mean, ask all the biggest change makers in the world, I think that they would probably say, “Yeah, good luck with not running into some obstacles,” but we’ll get there. Maybe. Let’s see. All right. And so, tell me a little bit about what your experience has been so far that makes you feel like, because you don’t have the technical knowledge, it feels like you’re losing their trust. What evidence do you have of that?
YARA: I tend to ask a lot of questions. They bear with me actually, and they tend to answer, but sometimes I get the feeling that I’m the weak link in the team. Sometimes I feel like I cannot talk about this issue because I’m not that knowledgeable, and therefore I cannot have my say in it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, as a result, what happens then?
YARA: As a result, I tend to, sometimes I just stay silent or maybe try to bring it without creating so much conflict.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you mean, “creating so much conflict”? What does that look like?
YARA: Actually, this is a tough question. I’m not sure, to be honest. Maybe it’s just a feeling that whenever I try to discuss things or have a say in issues it turns that, “well, we already have this process and we go by one, two, three. So, why change it now? Or are you sure of what you’re saying?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, they are actually – they’re asking you, “are you sure of what you’re saying?”
YARA: Yeah. Some-
MURIEL WILKINS: Or is it how you receive it?
YARA: Maybe how I receive it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I kind of want to play a little game with you, right, of, I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of, I don’t even know if it’s a real game, but I’m going to make believe it is. Right? Fact or fiction. I’m sure when you were in elementary school, if you were in a school like me, like in lower school and they were trying to make you determine what’s fact and what’s fiction and you had to figure it out. Except this time, instead of saying fact or fiction, we’re going to play fact or
feeling
. Okay.
YARA: Sounds good.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Fact is what you can point to that’s actually happening, right? That you say, I think we should implement this process. You actually said it. It’s a fact. Feeling is whatever it is that you tell yourself is happening as a result of either how you said it or how people reacted or what not. Okay. So, I think it’s important here to distinguish between the two. When you’re in a situation with your team where they bring up an issue, for example, and you don’t have the full technical knowledge about that issue, what is that? A fact or a feeling?
YARA: It’s a fact.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s a fact. So, we’re not going to make it up. We’re not going to make like you actually have all the expertise in the world or that you have nothing. You just don’t have all of the technical knowledge that they have. And what is the feeling that happens that’s associated with that?
YARA: Weakness.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why weakness?
YARA: Because this is how I perceive lack of knowledge. Like if you’re not knowledgeable, then you’re not strong enough to lead the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And where did that narrative come from?
YARA: From me?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, is that a “story” – and I’m using quotation marks – which you’re kind of stating as an assertion? Is it one that’s helpful for you, or not helpful for you in this particular situation?
YARA: No. It’s not helpful, but sometimes I try my best to read a lot before we have a meeting or a discussion. And I have someone in the company that I trust a lot. So, I always go there and ask him a lot of questions. So, yeah, sometimes I’m on top of things. I feel like I know how this process goes, but if they get into too much detail, then now it’s not that helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I understand you try to get help and that you’re sort of using your feeling of not knowing as much to say, okay, let me go and ask some questions. But going and asking questions and it propelling to that, I’m trying to understand why you’re associating that with being weak.
YARA: It’s not that asking questions is the weak part. It’s the part when I have to say something or have I have to give my suggestion and I cannot do that because I get this feeling that if I’m going to say something, then it’s going to sound stupid.
MURIEL WILKINS: And has somebody told you that it sounds stupid?
YARA: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, you’re telling yourself a lot of things.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I mean, you’re reading into a lot. And I’m not saying that there’s nobody out there who doesn’t think you’re stupid. I mean, I’m sure there are a lot of people out in the world who think I’m stupid, but I don’t know for a fact. So, part of what’s happening right now, I believe for you, is that you’re turning your feeling about what you think may be happening into a strong fact as what is actually happening, and my sense is if I was in the room with you, what is actually happening is somebody from this team who’s been on this team much longer than you. Fact, right? Therefore, the assumption that they know more than you is realistic. Fact. That you are expecting yourself to know just as much to be able to keep up with everything that they’re saying when you’re four months into the job.
YARA: Exactly. That’s it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I mean, great for you for having high expectations, but there’s a difference between having high expectations and having realistic expectations of yourself. Let’s pause here because YARA is going through something. A lot of new managers and leaders go through, especially at a new company or in a new industry, she wants to do a good job, have an impact and help her team achieve, but she’s having a bit of trouble finding the balance between being comfortable coming up to learning curve while wanting to show up as credible and commanding the respect and authority she wants. It’s especially tough for her because the team has the technical expertise that she lacks, but in all kinds of industries, managers and leaders don’t necessarily have to have the same expertise as those on their team. And while that’s okay, YARA has not come to grip with this yet. Let’s dive back in as I ask her how the notion of self-expectations lands with her.
YARA: It gives me comfort. But when I think about it again, sometimes issues are not solved, and there has to be someone taking accountability for not solving it. For me, I’m supposed to solve those blockers and I’m supposed to do the communication. I get some people telling me, “You’ve got to do one, two, three and you got to do this and that.” So, yeah, it’s true what you’ve said. Like, maybe I’m having so many expectations for someone that has been only four months in this industry, in this role. But again, I took this challenge because I wanted to be stronger and I wanted to take a role that shows my inner leadership thing. But now I’m feeling like I’m falling behind.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s interesting to me that you said you took the role because you wanted to be stronger, not just to be strong. And so if you compare where you are today to when you started on day one, do you feel stronger?
YARA: Yeah. I’ve learned a lot and I understand many things that back then on my day one I did not understand or I was not following up to, but I kind of feel like it’s slow for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I want you to first give full credit to the fact that you have learned over the past four months. So, you are stronger than you were on day one.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. That’s a fact. All right. And based on that, we can assume what will happen in the future. Based on what your experience has been in the first four months, the fact that you’ve been getting stronger, you feel like you’ve been getting stronger. You are learning more, you know more now than you did on day one. What can we assume will happen in the next four months? Do you think you’re going to regress? Do you think you’re going to stay exactly the same? Or do you think you’re going to continue learning and getting even stronger?
YARA: No. I believe I’m going to continue learning and getting stronger, but the thing is, I’m just getting cold feet because it’s pretty overwhelming, and I don’t know how to start. Maybe I don’t have a solid plan. I’m trying to read as much as possible. I’m trying to follow up and ask people as much as possible. But yeah, it is still overwhelming. I haven’t yet got to this point where I have a solid plan of what I am going to learn in the future and what I am going to do. I only know that I have gaps and I know where those gaps are, but I don’t know how to go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. And so, I want to acknowledge your state right now of overwhelming and I can feel it. Right? I can feel it because every time we come up on like,
but here’s what happened
, you follow up with like, “Yeah, but.” Right? “Yeah, but.” And you’re sort of dismissing the good stuff that has happened for you, and the reason I keep pulling you back, which I can feel is a little frustrating for you, because you’re like kind of come on, Muriel, can we get to the plan? What are the three things I need to do? And I keep pulling you back to, “But don’t you see what’s happening here?” Here’s why I’m doing that. It’s very hard to come up with an effective plan that’s actually going to work and that you’re going to have confidence in if you don’t accept and really see what’s going on right now.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you’re not fully aware of like, “okay, yeah, here’s what’s actually worked. Here’s where I am right now. Here’s fact or fiction.” Now, based on that, what’s the plan that I want to make? I guarantee you in three months, you’ll be right back to where you are now. I have this vision of you where you’re rowing a boat to the other side of a lake and you see the other side of the lake and at the beginning you’re like, “Yup, I got it. I’m going to the other side of the lake.” Then you start rowing and you’re like a quarter of the way in, which is your four months. And you’ve gotten and you’re like, “Oh my God, this is hard. The lake looked so smooth when I looked at it, but now it’s not as smooth as it looked. And it’s really hard and my arms are tired and I’m just going to stay here and float for a little bit. And maybe I should go back to shore. But no, I’m here now, but I have no idea how to get forward.” And so, right now I’m just saying, “okay, well then rest your arms a little bit. Just stay here, get calm.” Right?
YARA: That’s actually the best metaphor I’ve ever heard.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, so what do you do with that metaphor? So, that’s where you are. You’re like a quarter of the way on the lake. So, what are your choices right now?
YARA: I believe I don’t have a choice, but continue doing it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You always have a choice. And here’s your choice: You can go back. Right? Which means you could say, “Forget this. I’m going back to my boring job that I had before because even though it was boring and routine, I knew how to do it and I excelled.” Right? Which is probably why it ended up being so routine for you. “I can do that. I can stay right here a quarter of the way in and just be like, this is it. This is it. This is what I’m doing. Or I can continue moving forward.” Based on that, what’s the choice that you’re making?
YARA: Continue rowing the boat to the other side. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, again, the reason why I kept pulling you back is in order to do that, you have to be still first. Take a pause, say, okay, let me just take stock of where I am before I continue rowing. So that’s what we’re doing. And then we can decide, how do you row? How fast do you row? What does it look like? How do I break it down? Now, here’s the thing, I told you you had a choice. You can move forward, you can stay where you are or you can go back. Each choice that you make requires a different mindset in terms of how you think about yourself and how you think about the situation. And that mindset will then help support whatever actions you take. Okay. What you cannot do is use the mindset that actually keeps you where you are or takes you back and expect to move forward. You get what I’m saying?
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, I don’t know why, I’m kind of in a game playing mood today. So I’m going to play a little game with you. What is the mindset that you believe you need to have in order to be able to support, I know we haven’t gotten to actions yet, in order to be able to support the choice that you just made, which is you want to keep moving forward on this traction of being and becoming an effective scrum master for your team?
YARA: Well, I believe the right mindset is I need to start thinking that lacking knowledge is not a weakness, if you’re trying at least, and if you’re pushing forward to learn more and ask more questions. And there is hope if you continue on learning and you continue on feeding your knowledge, then you’re going to get there. And it actually does matter that you have a say in whatever the team is discussing, even if you think that it’s not right or it doesn’t sound knowledgeable enough.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, you have a voice.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what’s interesting here, YARA, is what you are kind of surfacing is shifting to more of what’s called a growth mindset. And with a growth mindset, the difference… I’m going to kind of, like, really synthesize it down. It’s the difference between somebody saying, “I don’t know how to do this,” and shifting to a growth mindset which is, “I don’t know how to do this
yet
.”
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That “yet” infers a lot. So, when I add the “yet, “what does that mean for you?
YARA: It gives me a lot of space because yeah, no one can know better in four months. You need time to adjust, time to accommodate and space to accommodate this change, to learn more. It’s going to come.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s going to come. All right. You’re now in a place of,
I have hope. I’ve made a choice. I have hope I can do it. It’s going to happen. It’s just not happening right now, but at some point I’m going to have the knowledge and the technical authority to be able to put some of these process in place.
Okay. So, now we can move to action. Right? And here’s how I want you to think about it because I think what I also hear you doing is saying, “Here’s where I started on day one, fresh out of my certification, new on the job and here’s where I need to be.” I’m going to put words in your mouth here, which is not good, but just bear with me. “The most effective scrum master ever, okay? And my goodness, it needs to happen fast. It’s four months, why hasn’t it happened already? I just started swimming, but I should have made the Olympics already. What’s the problem?” Okay?
YARA: That’s exactly it. You put it the right way.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what we can do, it’s not to take away the dream of the Olympics. I’m not going to be the dream killer here, but I think what would be helpful for you is to sort of break it down into stages rather than you just focused on the gold of the Olympics. That’s the vision. That’s down the line at some point, but what’s the training plan to get there? And what are the milestones that you need to hit that will give you a sense that you’re on the path to being an effective scrum master? What kind of scrum master does the team need you to be by the end of your first year?
YARA: A scrum master that can protect them from any distractions, that helps them remove blockers on the road and a scrum master that has maybe the, not necessarily all the technical knowledge, but all the technical knowledge necessary for them to keep going smoothly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here as Yara shifts into action planning. We’ve established by now that YARA needs to set realistic expectations for herself, and she’s starting to do that by listing the qualities that her team needs from their scrum master. Now, all of the qualities she’s listed, they can be a bit subjective and there’s not necessarily a clear point at which she’s finished. So, it’s important to make them more concrete and break them down into more manageable chunks for her. In her case, by giving them a realistic timeframe, this’ll help her deal with the ambiguity she may feel as she follows her learning path, and she’ll get a sense of accomplishment rather than feel like she’s chasing a moving target. I get the sense that’s probably what’s causing you the most difficulty is the ambiguity. You don’t know what you don’t know, and that’s exactly why we’re trying the best that we can to make the process as concrete as possible for you, so that you have something to hang onto. And so, the biggest thing that you can be doing right now is to A, do exactly what you just did, which is accept that it is ambiguous. That’s why it’s been hard.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, stop thinking it should be easy. It shouldn’t be like this. And you said something earlier, which is, you said, “I have a sense of where my gaps are in terms of what it is that I don’t know, I don’t have the knowledge.” So, do you have, I just want to confirm, do you have that sense? Do you have a sense of, here are the areas where if I could just get a bit stronger from a knowledge standpoint, it would help take me from a two, to a three?
YARA: Yeah. I would, again, stress upon the knowing more about the product and knowing more about the technicalities behind it and what’s required. That’s number one. And number two, get more details and know how to extract the KPIs behind the team’s performance and how to improve those. That’s number two.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, that doesn’t sound ambiguous to me at all. It sounds very specific in terms of the areas, it’s not everything, but the areas that would create the most leverage for you right now in terms of your learning curve.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, then now that you know that, then it becomes, “Okay, how do I beef up my learning around that?” Right? You already mentioned that there are people that you can go to when you have questions. The people that you can go to is it, as something comes up, you reach out to them and you’re like, “Hey, I have a question about that.” Is that how that happens?
YARA: Yeah. Most of the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Most of the time?
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, that’s great. You should definitely continue to do that. And it’s great that you have reached out to people. It’s also very reactive to what’s happening in the moment. Okay. So, going back to our lake metaphor, when you’re rowing, you hit a rock and it’s when you hit the rock that you’re like, “Hey, hey, hey, wait a minute. How do I deal with it when I hit a rock?” Right. Versus when you were a couple meters away or yards away, you saw the rock coming and you said, “oh, there’s a rock that’s going to come, let me go call some people to figure out when they have situations where there’s a rock, what do they do? Even though I’m not there yet.” That’s being proactive. And I think part of what you need to do in your process is inject some proactivity to your learning. So, what does that look like? I keep using the word learning because I think you are on a parallel path right now. One part of your path is you started this new job. This other part of your path is it’s a complete new learning path. So, you have some modules that you need to work through. And I think you need to formalize it a bit. And what does that look like? I would suggest you identify some of the people that you feel are good resources for you, people who have the type of knowledge that you’ve identified you need, the two specific areas you said. And make a request from them, “Hey, can I meet with you for 30 minutes every two weeks or once a week or for an hour, once a month? And can you download for me everything you know about this area, I’ll come with questions, but could you start by telling me what are the things that I need to know about this?”
YARA: Sounds like a good plan.
MURIEL WILKINS: The other piece though, that we haven’t talked about is something that you’ve mentioned is, in the meantime, you’re still in these meetings and you said, “How do I have a voice in these meetings?” And I think at the beginning of the conversation you said there were two things kind of standing in the way for you. One is your knowledge and the other is, I believe you said was, your age – that you felt that because you were younger that you face some resistance.
YARA: Not for all people, but maybe a couple.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And you know for a fact that it’s because of your age?
YARA: No, I’m not really sure. I’m just assuming maybe. It’s because there’s this assumption that people get resistant to you if you are in a leading position and you are younger than them.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s an assumption. Who’s assumption?
YARA: I believe it’s a thing between people, that maybe you hear about it a lot. I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you’ve heard about it, it’s been said to you, like people have said, “Hey YARA, you’re going to get resistance from these few people because you’re younger and a leader.”
YARA: No, no, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: No. Okay. You’ve read about it somewhere? You saw a show on it?
YARA: No. I’ve heard some people’s-
MURIEL WILKINS: You believe it?
YARA: – issues about it. No, I maybe not. I’m not sure actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Okay. So, in our fact or fiction game, it’s questionable, right?
YARA: Yes. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Does it happen? I’m sure it happens. Is it happening? We don’t know.
YARA: We don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: But more importantly is the fact that you are younger than some people on your team. Is that something that’s in your control?
YARA: No. Definitely not.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. So, there’s nothing we can do about that. We can’t change your age. Okay. I mean, it is what it is. When you’re my age, you try a lot of things, but you still can’t do it. You still can’t do it. So, it still goes back to the experience.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it goes back to, as you put it, making sure that you are establishing trust with your team, because you started off by saying that you feel like you’re losing trust.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let me give you a little bit of a riddle. I don’t even know if it’s a riddle, a puzzle. If you’re the youngest person on your team and you don’t have the full level of expertise yet, what are other ways that you can gain the trust or build trust with team members besides being they’re same age or older or knowing as much or more than them? What are other ways that you can gain their trust?
YARA: I believe better communication. Having a sync with them. Maybe ask them around if I can do anything to help them make their lives easier. If they have feedback actually, to maybe give it to me, anything that they would like to share, maybe. If there is something that I know for sure I need to be doing, then I go ahead and do it, but at the same time maybe ask them if that’s the right way to do it. If they would add anything from their side, if they have any ideas or things to share.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, in essence, what you’re doing is you are engaging them in the process, right. You’re building a connection with them. And this is not to dismiss what you shared earlier that you feel like if you could give direction, then it would create trust, but trust is not just built by giving direction. Trust is also built by building connection.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what experience do you feel you need or what do you feel you still need to learn to be able to build connection?
YARA: I’m not really sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: I would ask you to sit with that because it might just be that you already have all the capabilities to build the connection piece of the trust equation, but you’re so focused on the other part of the equation, that I need to be able to be the expert and give direction, that you’re missing out on the trust building process that could have been happening and probably is happening over the course of the first four months. I just want you to realize you have a lot more at your disposal than you’re giving yourself credit for. It’s like having different muscles, but you’re just using one or you’re trying to use the one that isn’t fully grown yet. And meanwhile ignoring all the others and they’re like, “oh wait over here, over here, we can get you across the lake.: And you’re like, “No, I only want to use this muscle to get across the lake.” And they’re like, “Okay. Okay.”
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, trust is a multifaceted practice – trust building, that is. And what I would encourage you to do is think about, what are the different layers, what are the different actions that you can take that help move the needle on trust with this team, in spite of you not having the full technical expertise that they have, and in spite of you not being the same biological age as them. Because those are the two things that are not fully in your control at the moment. So, what is in your control? And it’s all the things you just said. Does that make sense?
YARA: It does.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And in order to be able to do that, I would offer you that the skill that’s probably going to be most helpful to you right now – is the skill of being able to ask the right questions rather than have the right answer. Okay? Do you see the difference?
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think the expectation you were putting on yourself was, “Something comes up and I just need to have the answer, I need to just solve, need to just save the world right all by myself.”
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And maybe one day you will, right. Let me know, okay? That would be great.
YARA: Definitely.
MURIEL WILKINS: But in the meantime, become an expert in knowing what questions to ask and in framing the question and in figuring out, if that’s the question, what’s the plan to solve it, rather than an expert in the solution in and of itself.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think that’ll help take some of the pressure.
YARA: It does. It does. Definitely. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It does?
YARA: At the end of the day, it’s a teamwork thing that has to be done within a team. There’s no one person that has one role that sticks to them. So yeah, I believe it has to be a team issue rather than one person’s issue to solve.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, it’s interesting to me as we’re talking about this because, forgive me, but I’m not wildly familiar with the role of scrum master. I kind of have a very surface level understanding of what it is, but inherent in the word itself, right? Like the word master, right? Just like, inherent in it is this “master.” There’s a certain level of mastery that is inherent in the title, and so, no wonder you have this expectation of yourself that from day one you need to have this mastery of everything. And so, maybe there’s an opportunity for you here, even though that’s the formal role title. What name could you give your role? How would you title your position in a way that is much more reflective of who you are and who you think you need to be for this team to meet its goals? Like if it were not scrum master and you could rename it, what would it be?
YARA: Maybe helpers/coach.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if you’re a helper/coach, how does that change the way you move about this role? The goal hasn’t changed, but does it change the way that you approach it?
YARA: Well, yeah, it does change a lot. There are some things and processes maybe, guidelines about the way of work about scrum mainly and how we do things that they need coaching about and how to be more of a self-organizing team. I believe I can do that well, maybe. And the other thing about solving blockers and helping them around, I believe I can do that without the pressure of being the only one that can do it. I can always help them, but at the same time ask them for more details. So, we all come up with a solution. It doesn’t have to be one person coming up with the solution.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s a very practical thing that I would suggest that you do. I would list… if you have a whiteboard in your office or if you have a notebook, someplace that’s visible. I think electronic makes it a little hard because you don’t see it. It’s something that you should be able to see. Okay. Visible to you. I want you to list in a column, the four or five things that you think are the areas that you want to get to, remember we said by the end of year one. Okay?
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then to the right of that, columns that are by day. And every day I want you to keep a journal. Doesn’t have to be long. You’re not writing an essay. You’re just jotting down in bullet points. What did I do today that helped move me a little bit closer? Even if it’s like a little tiny mini step, towards that goal that I have for myself of where I want to be by the end of year one.
YARA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: The second question is, what did I learn today in this particular area? Shouldn’t take more than five minutes a day.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want you to just keep track of it. Why do you think I’m asking you to do that?
YARA: Well, I believe first of all, it creates maybe a relief that there is some kind of a progress to it. And a daily reminder that there is progress. Maybe you cannot get there by tomorrow, but you will be getting there by the end of next month or the month after that, and it creates a sense of commitment that to keep moving forward that, yeah, you can do it. You’re showing progress. Just keep on going and you’re going to get there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, there’s a saying that, well, there’s two sayings that I’m going to share with you. One is that you can’t manage what’s not measured. Right. It’s one of the very few things I remember from business school. It was in my accounting class. Right. You can’t manage what you can’t measure. And in this case, what you’re managing is yourself.
YARA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the measurement is where you want to be in the future and where you are now and what steps are you taking to get there? The second saying is progress is not linear, meaning it doesn’t happen just straight up.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Progress is not linear. It’s zigzag.
YARA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, are there going to be days where you’re like, “I didn’t learn anything and I did not move towards the goal. In fact, I moved backwards.” Yes. There will be. But that’s just that day. It’s the whole picture that we’re interested in. And over time, regardless of whether you’ve moved back some then moved forward some, altogether it’s not even is there progress, but is there momentum? Are you gaining momentum towards being the leader that you want to be on this team? Okay. And so, I think with focus now, you can stop your rest period on the lake and continue to row forward. Okay.
YARA: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Terrific. Well, thank you. Thank you YARA.
YARA: Thank you. Thank you very much.
MURIEL WILKINS: For Yara, it was stressful to leave a comfortable job and take on this new challenge. But the main thing we worked through was thinking about how to make those challenges less ambiguous and more digestible so that she could walk away with concrete things to do in the form of a learning plan. What also helped her is the reframing of her role with less emphasis on technical mastery and more focus on that of a coach. When we started our coaching session, YARA wanted really specific answers from me. I purposely let her sit with her situation and without answers from much of our conversation, despite it being uncomfortable for her. Why? Because the coaching session mirrored what was happening to her in her role. She had to become comfortable sitting in the middle of that proverbial lake so that she could see where she was and then decide what direction to move in before she starts rowing again. Like YARA, sometimes we can all benefit from pausing to take stock of what we need to learn before we take action. That’s it for this episode, next time on
Coaching Real Leaders
.
NEXT EPISODE GUEST: And so, I guess one of the challenges that I’m facing right now is that I have a level of access, influence, and ultimately, opportunities for success that I’ve never had before, and I’m trying to find a way to synchronize those opportunities and to be very selective about which ones to choose in order to transition out of the military. And I feel like I have ideas for how I want to do that, but I feel like I’m really wrestling with how to say no to people. Whenever they feel like they have a need that I can fill, but that I don’t feel like aligns with those goals.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’d like to dive deeper into these coaching sessions, join me and the rest of the Coaching Real Leaders community for live episode discussions at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. And if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show, apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. Fromm HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Do I Ask for Help?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that, hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sabine to protect her confidentiality. She has, in her words, reached a high level in her career doing something she loves – through a combination of determination and a bit of luck.
SABINE: I always wanted to be creative, but I was never encouraged by my family. I was told I’d be a poor hippie. I didn’t have great educational experiences when I was younger. Basically, I was told if I wanted to go to school, I had to pay my way and the easiest way for me to do that was through sports. So, I basically got on an athletic scholarship. When I started teaching, I realized finally how I learned. I became addicted to curiosity. And once I had this feeling, I felt like I had the best gift in the world. No matter where I’m at in life, this will always help me break through to whatever’s next. And I think it’s the best gift you can give somebody is to help them find their voice.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sabine has parlayed her work ethic and love of teaching into her current role.
SABINE: I would say the passion for me is that it’s really about creating things from scratch and helping other people learn how to learn and accelerate their learning. I have to be both externally and internally efficient and effective. Internally, the people that I serve are essentially the partners, and my job is to distill their thoughts that are sometimes never been actually externalized, sometimes it’s just tips and tricks they’ve gained along the way, and extracting their top 1% of knowledge and making it compelling and engaging. And then the other audience that I serve are our clients who tend to be extremely high performing people that have gotten to where they are because they’re smart. And my job is to almost help them be smarter.
MURIEL WILKINS: She’s been powering through her career and really figured out something she loves, but she’s now facing some life circumstances that make her feel like she should start working smarter but not harder. Let’s start the conversation as I ask Sabine about what she’s looking to get out of our coaching conversation.
SABINE: For one, I think there needs to be a word for when you are really great at giving advice to other people, but not yourself. And I just haven’t heard that word yet, but that’s why I’m here. Essentially, I’m trying to get ahead of a problem. I’m trying to look into the future and get a long view. And the problem statement that I’m coming in with today is, how do I approach my future career without having to do it all on my own? There’s been two key things that have catalyzed this problem for me. So, I had a pretty life-changing surgery, and so I’m on medical leave, and that puts you in a space where you’re in deep reflection. And physically, I cannot do what I’ve done before. So, the old approach to how I sought work and did my work, I don’t think will work anymore moving forward. And the second assumption that I have baked in was a seed that I planted in my head maybe a year ago and I’ve just ignored, but it’s really coming to fruition in this reflection. And it’s during the pandemic when there was these mass migrations of talent, I was starting to see, and I wasn’t looking, but I was just seeing my peers basically go in swaths to other companies. Six people would go to company A, 10 people would go to company B.
And I was thinking to myself, what conversations are they having that I’m not aware of? Is there some sort of secret language to finding your next job that I’m clearly not understanding? Or it’s an approach that’s just really foreign to me that I’ve never done before.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, why is this relevant now? Why is this question important to you right now?
SABINE: My health has certainly given me that shock to the system where I’m not willing, nor am I able to keep the pace that I was able to do before. And I’m worried that if I don’t have a long-term strategy for finding that next job or figuring out how to approach the rest of my career, I’m going to be stuck in an environment that might not be sustainable for me just in terms of what it’s asking of me physically. And I don’t think the old way of just seeing if a job pops up is going to work because the landscape that I’m in is not really defined for my role, and I can’t really go on LinkedIn and just search for this role.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it sounds like a big change for you has been around your desired and potentially required pace.
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, just so I understand. So thinking about a future career, not quite sure what that career looks like, presumably, or at least we’ll talk a little bit about that. And then how do you approach it? Because it’s not one of those things that just pops up in your email. You’re perceiving it as something where you might have to take a different approach to finding your next role, and that’s not something that you’ve had to do in the past.
SABINE: Correct, yeah. I don’t know how to.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, you don’t know how to. And what is it that you don’t know how to do?
SABINE: I don’t know how to help myself in my career. I just put my head down and work hard and care about what I care about deeply. But in terms of leveraging my past success and having that work for me, I don’t know how to do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So, where you do know how to help yourself is by doing the work?
SABINE: Yeah, it’s the only way I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s the only way, but it’s worked. It has been a way.
SABINE: It’s very tiring. It has worked, but I think it’s also unsustainable past a certain point. There’s a high burnout rate.
MURIEL WILKINS: Gotcha. At what point is that burnout rate for you?
SABINE: I was there six months ago, but now I’m forced to stop, so I’m past that point now.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think part of what we might want to start with is painting the picture of where it is that you’re going to, even though we don’t yet know whether it exists in reality. It sounds like you have a working definition of what’s not working for you. I’d love for you to explore what your operating, working definition is going to be about what you think will work for you. And so when I say that, what does the future career look like for you? What does the next role look like for you? What comes up?
SABINE: I would say it’s about 30% of what I currently have and 60% of what I don’t yet have. The thing I mentioned earlier is that the pace for me is not sustainable. There’s a relentlessness to it that I don’t want to keep up with. The things that I currently have that I’d like to continue in my future role is I’d like to work on products that are really considered leading industry products. I’d like to be in a global org, not necessarily narrowed in on one geo. The things that I don’t have that I would like, one is right now I’m basically like a lone operator, and I’d like to be in a team of other peers so that I’m not in a thought vacuum. I want to continue being a really senior IC, so leading within a team, not leading a team. I guess the main change that I’m really looking for is I want to go a little bit less from being that athlete at work to being more the expert at work. So, a little less doing, a little bit more guiding just to put some breaks on the work I’ve been taking on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. And so the athlete to expert is for the purpose of being able to slow down some?
SABINE: I think so. And it’s also just I’ve maximized those skills. I don’t want to keep doing the same thing over and over and again. For my own personal growth, I see that as a learning opportunity. And I think sometimes people can be better as coaches than athletes. In my sports career, I always felt that was the case with me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, moving from more of an athlete player to a coach?
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. What I’m not hearing you say directly, even though it came up in terms of what was important to you and what is a catalyst for this change is, I’m curious, what is the pace that you’re looking for in the future?
SABINE: I think waves of projects with thoughts in between rather than never-ending sprints, and not even sprints, never ending marathons. I think part of this comes from my background. One of the ways that designers really excel is when there’s a little bit of distance, so there’s a little bit of room to observe, or there’s a little bit of an angle for breathing space. And when I don’t have that, it’s easy to succumb to just the work and not be as creative as I want to in my thought process, and that’s part of what’s driving this need for just breaks and cycles.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, in your experience, the way that you had, and I’m sure there’s other components to what your dream role would be next, but have you seen that dream role or that future role in existence in some form or fashion anywhere?
SABINE: I haven’t.
MURIEL WILKINS: You haven’t?
SABINE: That’s another challenge that I haven’t explicitly said, but you might get … I don’t know. It’s kind of if you see a person, maybe you’re like, “They look like what I’m interested in, but they don’t really have all the qualifications.” So no, I haven’t seen anything like exactly. Not that I’m looking for exactly what I want, but the core of what I’m looking for I have not seen existing in the world.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And let’s say tomorrow, this role, as you described, did come up, was offered to you, what trade-offs would you be willing to make to acquire that role? Meaning, is there anything that you’d be willing to give up or to make less important for you in order to have a role where you now are on a team of peers, you’re more of a coach rather than the athlete, there’s spaciousness between projects?
SABINE: I think the thing I’d be willing to give up is my desire to be an IC versus leading other people. I’ve led other people in the past, but I’ve found that I’m an empath and I often take on their emotions. And rather than being that direct line of responsibility, I like being a coach where it’s almost like an aunt or an uncle rather than a parent. I find that a little liberating and creative.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, I’m asking the question because I think, sometimes, we say, oh, this is what we want, and we don’t recognize that we might have to let go of something in order to pick up something else. Instead, we’re like, “Oh, no, I’m just adding to the bag.” Right?
SABINE: Yeah, it’s like buying a house.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. And then it’s like, “Ooh, I can’t find a house that size, or I can’t afford a house that size.” So, not to say you can’t have it, it’s just being ready for there may be potential trade-offs that you have to make when the time comes. How about as tactical things as willingness to move, compensation? Are there trade-offs you’d be willing to make around those very lower level decisions, but yet very important decisions we have to make about our career?
SABINE: I’d be willing to move. Compensation is something I’ve worked hard for and I would like to keep it where it’s at or improve.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. Just for you to know as you start thinking about what are all the different parameters, because those, as much as I said, oh, describe what the current role looks like, I also think you need to … It’s kind of like you describe the house, and then what does the fence look like? What are the boundaries that you want to put around it? What are the parameters so that when you see it, you know that’s what you want. And more importantly in your case, you can start working towards what it is that you want. What’s your approach from getting closer to that role? I want to come back to part of the catalyst here, which is around a requirement of change of pace for you. Clearly we’re talking about your career as it relates to your feeling of burnout in terms of how you described it and it being unsustainable. To what extent is your career what you feel led to your physical burnout or your overall sense of burnout, and is it the sole factor that led to that?
SABINE: I would say I’ve prioritized my career willingly over the past 10 or 15 years because frankly it brings me joy. It’s not a career for me. What I’ve done or liked as a person has always naturally I’ve been able to do as a job. In terms of the burnout that I’ve experienced recently, there was a few things. I didn’t take a break, total newbie, move between the two jobs. I transferred into an industry that was completely different. I transferred into a subject matter area that I was not as familiar with. So, the learning curve was just extremely steep. And in hindsight, I think I put myself in an environment that wasn’t sustainable, even though I was highly able and capable to fulfill the role. And so I actually think it’s the environment that I am finding unsustainable.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And at what point did you get the sense that this environment might not be the one that is most sustainable for you?
SABINE: I would say about a month into the job. But my fiber or my fabric or DNA of who I am, always I pursue and there’s a determination to me. And it’s not to prove anybody wrong, but it’s just a stamina that I have and I will complete a job until it’s done. But I think I would’ve continued or can continue at this job had it not been for this just weird change of events with my health. That’s a little scary.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what I want to be mindful of is we can course correct for the environment. You can find another environment. That doesn’t guarantee that the thing that drove your pace, that eventually led to staying in the environment that you’ve been in, and then eventually led to the burnout that you’ve experienced, that doesn’t guarantee that that goes away.
SABINE: My habit.
MURIEL WILKINS: The habit, exactly. So, what we want to try not to do is put a bandaid on the real source of the issue, which is what your approach has been. And your approach is grounded in your superpower. You were like this relentless pursuit of what you need to make it. I mean, you even said you were told if you’re going to go to college, you’re going to have to do X. You’re going to have to get your way through it. And so, that’s what you did. You were a student athlete, which is really hard to do, and you worked through it. And now here again, you work through your career until you couldn’t anymore.
SABINE: I feel like I’m retiring from a professional career and I’m going to transition into a new one or something, even though-
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. In the words of somebody who I hugely admire, Serena Williams, you’re evolving.
SABINE: That’s right, that’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re not retiring, we’re evolving. Okay?
SABINE: Yeah. There you go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. Sabine’s situation is particular in that she’s been facing a health crisis, but it’s also pretty universal in that many people, high achievers, workaholics, whatever you want to call them, power through to reach success in their careers. But many of those people also reach their breaking point where they don’t know how they can continue working at that pace and they want a change. While it’s easy to think that all you need is a change of environment or job to slow down, it’s also important to look at your own self to see what changes you need to make so that you don’t end up in the same burnout situation again. As much as Sabine was ready to explore how others could help her make a career shift, it was important that she start with herself and what she’d need to do to work at a more sustainable pace, no matter where she lands. Let’s pick the conversation back up as she begins to unpack what assumptions about work she holds and how she might need to change them.
SABINE: My old way of working, which was just find one job, stay in it until I can’t do it anymore, go into the next job and just hop from lily pad to lily pad without foresight, that approach is not going to work. It’s short sighted And it’s creating burnout. So, my assumption as well is that this new approach is going to require more than just me, I guess, maybe a network or community of people to help me get to where I want to go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And may I suggest that you don’t give up one approach or the other and more approach it from a place of I’m expanding my approaches. So-
SABINE: So, not retiring, evolving. And I’m not exploding, I’m expanding my possibility.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re expanding. Exactly, exactly. And what you’re expanding from is, okay, yes, you had one approach and guess what? It did lead to some successes. I mean, you have carved out a pretty amazing career for yourself. And we’ll call that, as you put it, the jumping from lily pad to lily pad and reacting to what’s ahead of you. That can work, and what that would mean is if today some opportunity popped up, I don’t want you to be like, “No, no, no, no, no, that that’s my old approach. I’m not looking at it.” No, still be opportunistic and take a look, and let’s figure out if there are other approaches that expands the potential for opportunities and expands the way that you approach career-seeking and career-planning that then provides you with more range in what the possibilities are for you. There’s a bit of, I understand and want to acknowledge the space that you’re in today, which is your health has been impacted in a way that’s significant and material for you. And it’s very easy when we get to those places to then look at everything that’s led up to that as quote-unquote, “bad” and how could I have, and I took the wrong path. And what I want to offer you or suggest is that you give yourself some grace and some credit that what got you here, yes, may have resulted in your health pattern, but did not necessarily … isn’t the full story. Where you are here from a health standpoint is not your complete story. You also have this very amazing, other parts of your life. So, for lack of a better sophisticated word, let’s not poo-poo all over it.
SABINE: Done.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, we’re going to hold that and then we’re going to move on to the rest. Okay?
SABINE: I have a question for you on that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah?
SABINE: As you’re saying this, I’m feeling almost like a little bit of guilt that I let myself get to this state, that I was so burnt out that I had this extreme situation. And I’m not saying that it was necessarily the causation of it, but there are parts of me that thinks it was correlatory. If I had been more in tune with my needs, maybe I would’ve caught things earlier. And I’m glad you said to give myself some space because I didn’t realize it until you had said that, but I think I’m being a little hard on myself where I’m not maybe forgiving myself for letting myself get to that point. And so, I think I need to just maybe, as you said, give a little bit of pause and just give that space so that when I do move forward and I am kind of looking at this evolutionary approach with more possibilities, that’s not even a focus in the back of my head. It’s like, I’m good, I’ve put that to bed, let’s move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, what would that look like for you to even give yourself that space?
SABINE: Honestly, just talking about it with you now and just acknowledging it feels pretty good.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Brené Brown, who I bow down to, talks about guilt and what the root of guilt is, which is shame. And so, if we just take that framework, what’s the shame in you having gotten to this point in your health?
SABINE: I’m relatively young and it was a shock. It felt a little bit self-inflicted.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think there are a lot of assumptions there. And I’m taking a pause because I’m thinking about when I asked you to describe what has propelled you in your career. You named three things, determination, fortitude, and luck. And when I hear you talk about where you are right now, it seems like you are relying on the determination and fortitude and almost saying, man, if I had more … Somehow determination and fortitude would’ve stopped this from happening and you’re leaving the luck part completely out of the picture. And luck works both ways, right? Luck is when we say, oh, that’s not in my control. And there is a lot that’s not in our control, but luck can work in our favor and against our … Or it’s not even favor, it’s against what we would hope happened. And in this case, the part that’s not in our control fully, as you said, it’s part of the equation, but the part that’s not in our control is what happened. And that’s the space to realize you could do all the quote-unquote, “right things” and still be where you are.
SABINE: Well, I mean, admittedly, I’ve done a lot of wrong things too, but that’s the way that I learn, which is actually the best way to learn. I think in a way almost if I had … This comes back to the point where I’m better at helping other people better than myself. I understand that cerebrally, I understand that unfortunately life is probably 50% pain and it’s probably 50% joy. It felt different to me this time because it happened to me versus when I’ve seen it happen to loved ones or something. And I think the support I provide them is probably different than the support I would provide myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s the support that you provide them?
SABINE: I think I can observe their needs and I can look at them and fill in the gaps and I could just meet them where they’re at. With myself, unless it’s right in front of my eyes, like dead smack staring at me, I don’t realize it. I’m just like, “Oh, I need something. Okay, I’ll deal with it now.” It’s delayed and it’s a lot more blunt.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is what we call … I mean, what you’re describing, even from a leadership standpoint, we’ve talked so much about having the leader who is compassionate. So, compassion means being able to sit with another’s suffering with an open heart. And in order to build capacity for compassion for others, you really need to be able to build capacity for self-compassion. And what I’m hearing you say is I’m able to sit with somebody else’s needs. I’m able to do that with my people at work. I’m able to do that with loved ones. And yet, I haven’t quite built the capacity yet to sit with my own needs and sit with my own discomfort, not to sound dramatic, but in this case it is literal, my own suffering.
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
SABINE: Cuts deep.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s deep?
SABINE: As they say, that cuts deep.
MURIEL WILKINS: That cuts deep, that cuts deep. Yes. In what way?
SABINE: It’s not unusual for I think people to put their energy into places where they want to give back. And I would say that’s part of my career, I’m trying to give people maybe what I didn’t have. And so I think it’s, even if I haven’t developed that capacity yet, or maybe I haven’t strengthened that capacity yet, I think it’s there. I think part of the way that I try to do that is one, give to others, but also just let that experience of giving to others, through osmosis, develop my own capacity better.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, that’s a really interesting approach, Sabine. And a lot of people approach it that way, if I give to others, then I am giving to myself. Or if I help others be joyful, then it will bring me joy, and it actually doesn’t work that way.
SABINE: Many people are irresponsible about it too I will add.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. The way it works is … It’s so funny where I get sometimes my learning moments for myself, but I will quote some other people here. I can’t remember which one, but one of my favorite Peloton instructors says something like, “You’ve got to be able to pour into the other’s cup while you pour into your own at the same time.” It’s not, I’m going to pour into the other person’s cup and therefore my cup will be full. No, you pour into both. So, I think part of this for you is understanding that what you’re giving out, you also need to be using the boomerang effect and giving to yourself as well. Now the good news is clearly you have the ability to be helpful because you said, I don’t know how to help myself, but you have the ability to help because you’re doing it for everybody else. And now it’s like, how do you then help yourself in the same way that you help others, which is understanding their needs, filtering down and synthesizing what those needs actually mean and then putting them into practice and executing on them. And so, part of that is starting with what you’ve defined. If we bring it back to the job search, well, then what kind of job do I actually need that will help me? What does it mean to be sustainable for me? What does that look like for me? Always bringing it back to yourself. And when I say that, bringing it back to yourself, how comfortable are you with that?
SABINE: I think it’s doable. I think out of the things that you asked me for, the strongest indicator of what I need right now is just a team of peers. I’ve been in a vacuum and I need other people to learn from in what I specifically do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You need other people to learn from in what you specifically do. All right. And it sounds also like what you need is other people to just help you do the work.
SABINE: Yeah. I know I need to scale myself and it’s been on the roadmap for a long time and it’s inevitable. I could use some help as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What have you done to move towards more of a sustainable situation within your current role?
SABINE: Does taking medical leave count? [inaudible 00:29:44] I bought time.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know what? I’m going to give you a check plus on that one.
SABINE: Thank you. Thank you. Apparently you need medical write-off for that, it’s not self-nominated. Other than that, nothing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Who else knows that you are feeling the way you do in terms of feeling like it’s unsustainable and you’re in the burnout phase?
SABINE: I haven’t told anyone, put it that way. The very perceptive people can tell, but I haven’t admitted it either.
MURIEL WILKINS: You haven’t admitted it. And what got in the way of that?
SABINE: I think it can put you in a position of risk if the environment isn’t accommodating to it. And I was still in observation mode and I didn’t intuitively feel like I was in that space where I could without jeopardizing my options. I didn’t want to put that card down.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s very real. So, assessing the risks, not feeling fully safe to be able to do that. What would you need to feel, quote-unquote, “safe enough” to share where you are?
SABINE: I find, with these hard conversations, it often helps to fly to a 20,000 foot elevation. So, maybe you’re feeling very intense about something because it’s quite present and it’s visceral for me. So, I think what I need is to have a conversation about, look, this is what I’m heading for in my long-term future, or this is how it might include you. Given that, here’s what I need on a day-to-day, kind of like a 5K foot view. And I think I haven’t been able to have those long-term career conversations because like I said, I’ve just been nose to the grindstone and there hasn’t been time work-wise, nor have I made time for myself for that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what would make you be able to have those conversations in the future?
SABINE: One of the great things about this break is that I’ve had a ton of time to reflect in my few short weeks because you’re lying in a bed and so, your brain just goes in overdrive. First, I think I needed clarity on what that future is. And then after that I think it’s just reaching out to some select people and just asking for their trust.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how realistic do you think that is for you?
SABINE: Before I went on break, I would say it was probably about a 50-50% risk. When I go back, I’d like to reassess the situation. A lot of things could have changed that I’m not aware of. I could have that conversation with people outside of my current environment. I have great relationships with tons of my old peers and colleagues, but I never considered any of them like a mentor or a sponsor, they’re just friends.
MURIEL WILKINS: But what would you be looking for in having those conversations? What’s the desired outcome?
SABINE: A sounding board, much like we’re doing now, someone to just objectively say, I’m hearing you say this, is this what you’re looking for? And I think out of those conversations, what I’d be looking to have is almost from a friend more than a colleague point of view is what … The question would be like, is what I want to achieve, do you think doable in this environment realistically?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, that I think is the question that you need to be direct with and ask whether it’s internally in your organization or externally elsewhere, as you start looking for that role. The difference between being reactive, that has been your approach up till now, the lily pad jumping, right? You’ve been reactive. The opportunity has come up, and the opportunity has basically said, hey, does this look good to you? And you’ve answered yes or no. The different approach now that we’re moving to, which is more proactive is you’re saying, hey, here’s what I want, does it look good to you? And they can say yes or no.
SABINE: It feels a lot more empowering than what I’ve been doing before.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. With that comes some risks. The risk is that they say no, but guess what? You already identified what the risks were in your other approach. So there’s risks either way. So what I’m sensing in our conversation is a hesitation to fully put out there what it is that you want and need out of concern of how it might be responded to.
SABINE: Partially. I don’t think I was clear on what I wanted or I needed until this break.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sabine came to the conversation looking for better guidance on how to plan out her career. But what she’s finding is getting in her way is her reluctance to state what she wants and needs out of her professional role. And she’s so used to doing things on her own, she also hasn’t always asked for help in managing her career. But this forced break from work has really given her an opportunity to sort through her priorities. So, now we can go ahead and start looking at ways she can have conversations both internally and externally about what it is she wants. There’s three ways this can go. You can either wait and hope that somebody one day just miraculously pops up and says, hey, remember that role that you said you wanted when you were laying in bed and you conjured it up and you’re like, here it is? So, that would be your old way. Option number two is you go have one of these more sound-boarding conversation, mentoring conversations or even more mentoring where it’s like, hey, this is how I’m feeling, it hasn’t been sustainable for me, it’s been really hard. And then you cross your fingers and hope that the person on the other side will say, wow, well, you know then? What if the role was like this? And then you react to it and say, oh my gosh, yes. How did you know? That’s exactly what I want. So, you can go to option three, which is, I’ve thought about it, I know what the pros and cons are. I’m now crafting, designing, creating, which by the way, you’re really good at, what I want that next role to be. Let me go and talk to select people about it and test whether it’s even possible. And if it’s not possible here, then I have a choice to make. And so, I laid out some options. How do they sound to you?
SABINE: The first two, I would say sound status quo in terms of possible, I’ve done that already, maybe not the second one as much as the first one. The whole proactive versus reactive mindset’s really resonating me, and so I’m compelled to think that really what I want is that third approach, which is me stating what I want and putting out there and seeing how people react rather than me accommodating to other people’s needs as much. I think it’s the only way I’ll feel like there’s more balance, the kind of balance that I need.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what do you feel you need to be able to do that, to chase option number three, if that’s what you’re choosing right now?
SABINE: I think I can craft my needs in a pretty simple and hopefully intelligent way. I struggle with knowing, I guess who to speak to or how to approach them. Like I said, I’ve never had formal mentors or sponsors, but I leave every job usually, and this is not to toot my own horn, but I leave jobs with great reputation, so it’s not like I’m burning bridges. I guess I don’t know how to leverage a community or a network.
MURIEL WILKINS: What does that even mean, leverage a community and a network?
SABINE: I don’t know, I don’t know. Network’s a weird word and so is community, but this is the part where it’s like, I just don’t want to do it on my own. I’d like to have some help from others.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. That’s what I wanted. I wanted to fully understand what does that even mean? You don’t want to do it by yourself.
SABINE: I’d like to learn from other people that are a few steps ahead of me, even if it’s somewhat adjacent or tangential to what I’m doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so you want to learn from them. What else do you want from them?
SABINE: Advice in terms of is what I’m laying out tenable? Are there potentially industries that I’m not considering? Are there potentially people I should speak to? I mean, the cherry on top would be like, hey, I have a job for you that meets exactly what you’re looking for.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, wouldn’t it be great if you’re talking to people who also potentially have line of sight into opportunities?
SABINE: I would love that.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Sabine, don’t bury the lead here, you want a job.
SABINE: I want a great job.
MURIEL WILKINS: You want a great job. So, there’s your criteria. Look at your list of people, who has something to offer in terms of advice? Who has something to offer in terms of experience? Who has something to offer in terms of line of sight into opportunities and potentially influence and decision-making position towards those opportunities? Who has the intersection of all three? Because they’re the holy grail. What you have at the very least is a network, a community, as you’ve said. You have people, you’re just not leveraging them.
SABINE: I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: “I know,” she says sheepishly. So, it’s how do you leverage them? I think the first place is you drill it down, you focus. You don’t just spread yourself thin. You say, okay, just the same way we articulated for you, what’s the career you’re looking for, where is it that you need help? Who do you need help from? So, you need help in terms of advice, support, opportunities. But let’s even start with the first is, who’s your board of advisors? Who are your people that can be helpful to you? So, right now you’ve articulated what you need. All right, who falls in that sweet spot? That’s who your outreach list is.
SABINE: It’s interesting because I think one of the things that was holding me back is that I didn’t feel like I had a clear ask and I didn’t want to come to people without a clear ask. And that’s because I’ve been on the other side of the equation quite often, I mean almost always actually, where people are asking me for help or mentorship, and I don’t think all requests for help are created equal. And I wanted to be, I guess strategic and smart about how I wanted to ask for help. And now that I’ve clarified those, or that you’ve clarified those three things for me, that gives me a much more solid foundation where I think I feel a lot more comfortable doing that. It was a barrier before.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, you now have your clarity of ask. You now have, we’ll hypothetically say, you have your list of people or you will in the next few weeks. What happens after that?
SABINE: I think it’s kind of putting pen to paper, just making a very simple brief, two paragraphs at most, maybe a few bullets identifying this is what I want, these are the pillars of what I’m looking for, and then making a short list of people. And then I think just putting myself out there and seeing where it goes.
With the people that I trust, I don’t feel like there’s the risk if I say something wrong or it’s not perfect messaging. There’s that space where I could just get close enough and they’ll help me get the rest of the way.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what you need to be careful of is potentially missing out on the opportunity to make your specific ask out of concern for how it’s going to be handled. So, what does that mean to you when I say that?
SABINE: Good catch, but I don’t know how to do that either.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, how you do that is, yes, you might come in with framing it a little bit higher level in terms of framing it as seeking advice, but have your ask in your back pocket because if you see an opportunity to present it, then you present it.
SABINE: What would that sound like? Or how would you phrase that?
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it depends on how the person responds. In an ideal way, they will say, well, so what is it that you want? And then they’ve asked you. If you’re halfway there and you’re not sure, you can maybe say, I’m thinking about potentially different options. I’m not dead set on this, but here’s something I’ve been thinking about. So, you caveat it a little bit. But what I don’t want you to do is go to, I’m not sharing at all, and go in with that attitude and then not even notice when there is an actual opening for you to share.
SABINE: It almost makes me think that I just need to scenario plan a little bit. And as you mentioned, there’s these three things that I’m looking for. And then maybe there’s different levels of, let’s just say viscosity in terms of how much I can share with this person. And then almost make a little bit of a map, like here’s a two liner that I could share with that person just so I have a little bit of a roadmap of how I’d like the conversation to go, of course adapting to how I view it going.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that’s a great idea. And if you have some people that you do trust, like a friend, a colleague that’s a trusted friend, you might want to role-play it out with them before you actually go out in the real streets and do this and have these meetings. Have them play the trusted advisor, mentor, sponsor where you can come in and be very direct with what it is that you want. Have them play the in between person and then have them play the person that’s like, let me keep this high level. And practice it out loud.
SABINE: That’s a great idea.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Let me just play this out with you since we were talking about scenario planning. What’s the worst that could happen when you have these conversations?
SABINE: The worst-case situation would be that I don’t get any helpful information, which is not that bad, it’s just a waste of time. Not really. But the worst case situation is that the conversation goes nowhere, and I don’t think anybody would think any less of me in reality.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SABINE: Noted, it’s not that bad.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I mean, it lands you back to where you already are.
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, worst case is the status quo.
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think as you do your outreach, as you go into these conversations, it’s also thinking about what do you have to gain from having this conversation and what do you have to lose? And then making a choice. So, how has it worked for you in the past when people have come to you?
SABINE: I usually think of it in terms of a three-point diagram. One is, can I actually help them with their ask? Do I have the skills where I actually feel like I could provide value? And then I think the second one is, do they have a clear sense of their ask? And do they actually have a need that I feel is a real need, or is it just a, I want a favor, dialing in a favor and I might not need it that much. Need actually matters to me a lot. And then the third one is like, do I want to help them? Do I like them? So, I think about those three things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if you were to take those three things, how would you frame your outreach to others to make sure that those three variables are at least being considered?
SABINE: Have a clear understanding of their skill or expertise or opportunity or whatever it is that they excel at. Be very clear and explicit about that upfront that this is what I’m trying to tap into, establish some rapport. And then the third one is just be very, very clear and simple about what it is I’m asking them for and why I think they can help me.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I would encourage you to be as transparent as you want them to be with you.
SABINE: What we’re talking about is an approach essentially for, let’s say, some near term action that I’d like to take to explore future possibilities and roles. And this is, I mean, we’re really kind of talking about different approaches to communication and a plan for it, but is this a ongoing practice that most people have? Are most people continually doing outreach searching for what’s next?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m going to turn the question back on you. Is this a practice that you continuously want to have?
SABINE: I’ve never done it before, so I don’t know. It seems a little exhausting to do this all the time. I mean, there’s joy and feeling comfortable and rooted in a place. So no, I don’t think I want it all the time, but I imagine that it’s somewhat cyclical and it’s like a muscle you have to engage every few years or quarters, depending on how you’re doing it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think the operating statement that you made at the end there was depending on what you’re doing. So, I could hear and very naively give you a generic yes, you should be doing this all the time, but that would be generic. You wouldn’t need a coach to do that because you could just go read here are the top 10 tips on what to do to advance your career and follow all 10. What we’re trying to do now is really laser it down to what are the two or three most pertinent, salient actions that you can take, and the way you figure that out is what actions are the most aligned to the goal that I have so that I can be information to get there. So, as I often say, “I don’t know if you should keep doing this all the time “ – Why don’t we try this time? Let’s see if it’s even something that you want to invest your time and energy in as one approach, and then take it from there. The question that you didn’t ask, but I’m going to ask for you, is asking for help from others a critical part of one’s leadership journey and career in order for them to grow and in order for them, in your case, to lead in a sustainable way?
SABINE: It’s a very good question. I think you can certainly grow internally. That’s always been my way of working. If you’re not unaccustomed to help being an option, you help yourself. And within that, there’s huge growth opportunities. I mean, I’m self-taught in almost everything. I think there’s potentially, in my experience, a little bit of a cap on terms of exponentially how far I can go, just doing it on my own. And I’m at that fulcrum point where it’s like I want the compounding interests of my work and my growth, my learning, not necessarily my professional success, but my development and my growth as a human. And life is richer with others or with help. And you don’t need it, but I would like it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, Sabine, the beauty of it is you’ve got the individual thing down pat, and now it’s saying, uh-oh, I’m not just going to be the singles tennis player, I’m going to be a doubles tennis player, but I’ve got to go look for a partner. So, I think what you have an amazing opportunity for right now is before you are even placed in an official formal team sport where you’re part of a team and then it’s like, oh, shoot, now I have the team and I’ve got to leverage and I’ve got to be able to do this, being able to practice the skills of asking for support and making requests and asking for help and being okay not doing it on your own. You have an opportunity to do that right now out of necessity. I mean, I would even ask, not to totally get into your personal stuff, but even in the season that you’re in right now where you’re dealing with health challenges, to what extent have you used this opportunity to exercise that muscle of making sure that you are being supported by others?
SABINE: Yeah, it’s been unnatural to me, but it’s not been as bad as I thought. It’s been a good stepping stone. And I was surprised that so many people stepped in. So, it’s there, it’s just unnatural.
MURIEL WILKINS: Unnatural.
SABINE: For now. For now, for now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, unnatural. And so even, why don’t we say it’s something that you’re not used to anymore.
SABINE: Much better, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because there was probably a time in your life where you did rely a lot on people. I mean, you were a baby once.
SABINE: Yes, I was a baby once.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t think you came out of the womb with like, dammit, I’m doing everything on my own and I’m sheer determination.
SABINE: Oh my God. Thank God, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you have practice in seeking support and getting support, right?
SABINE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, it’s getting back into the practice of it. That’s all it is. It’s there.
SABINE: It’s so funny how your personal ways of being can just permeate your professional life, and they’re not that distinct often. I mean, it’s like how can you not dissect or how … They’re so intertwined and it’s always very humbling to see when those personal habits are impacting other parts of your professional life.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, you’re a whole being, right? It’s not like you leave one part and can come back. It’s hard to compartmentalize in that way as you’re experiencing now. So, I encourage you to look at, even before I’m in a situation where professionally I might have to leverage others in an actual role, what are your opportunities to actually exercise that muscle now, as uncomfortable as it might be? Because all you’re feeling right now is the discomfort, and that’s okay. It’s okay to be uncomfortable. It’s okay, as uncomfortable as it might be, so that I build the simple muscle of recognizing when I need help or support and being able to ask for it or get it. That’s the skill.
SABINE: Yeah, understood.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. And?
SABINE: And I’m thinking to myself, I’ve got a lot of work to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Don’t we all?
SABINE: Yeah, in a good way. In a good way. We’re all good.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re all good. We’re all good. Well, listen, thank you so, so much.
SABINE: Thank you. This has been a gift.
MURIEL WILKINS: The week after my coaching meeting with Sabine, I received an email from her. It read, “Muriel, last week’s coaching session was illuminating. I gained clarity on my goals, blockers, and tactics. More importantly, I’ve internalized a razor-thin line between my professional and personal self and how critical it is for me to manage both. As I take my leadership to the next level, I’ll be thinking of the following shifts we lasered in on together, from reactively jumping into roles to proactively finding future opportunities, from leading compassionately to also being compassionate with myself, from desiring others’ help to permitting myself to be helped, from relentless pursuit to growing and leading sustainably. You have given me so much. Merci. Signed, Sabine.” As a coach, it’s not me who gives to my clients, they give themselves what they need by showing up, finding their answers, and doing the work. All I simply do is facilitate that path for them. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and that’s a wrap on this season as well. We’re taking a break over the winter and I’ll be back with more episodes this spring. In the meantime, stay in touch by joining me and many others at my Coaching Real Leaders community, where I host live discussions on leadership issues and the coaching sessions you hear on this show. You can join at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant, Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. Of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Do I Transition Out of My Current Career?
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: HBR Presents. Hi, it’s Muriel. There’s a brief mention of suicide near the beginning of this episode. If you or anyone is having thoughts of suicide, please call the 24-hour National Suicide Lifeline. The number in the U.S. is 1-800-273-8255. I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Presents Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Mick to protect his confidentiality. He’s had a substantial career in the military, working in special operations and having deployed a number of times. He’s also pretty clear about what fuels his purpose.
MICK: Well, I had a pretty unstable childhood and a lot of that came with the challenges of bullying. I saw some pretty violent acts towards people that I cared about pretty early on, and I think I just kind of developed this desire to protect people and this desire to kind of foresee other people’s needs and then to try to meet them there. It’s giving back. You have this pain in your past, and it stirs up a lot of emotions, and I believe that those emotions can be used as fuel. I feel like I’m a very emotional guy as it is, and so whenever I see those things stirring up, I try to find a way to direct them into a way that is going to be healthy for the people around me and ultimately, what I know to be good for me as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mick didn’t get to this place of self-awareness easily. He was recently promoted to a leadership role, but has also been through hard personal situations along the way.
MICK: The thing about my job, I guess, that has changed over the last few years, on my last deployment, my brother committed suicide, and then I kind of came home to a very messy life. So, I really kind of found a passion for wellness and behavioral health advocacy really, and trying to break the stigma of that in the military. So, I’ve really been kind of focused on that for the last few years, and I would say that it’s those two things that kind of work in sync, right? That it’s the desire to do a hard job and to do it in a community that you love and that you care about, and then the driving passion is to take care of people. Whether that’s a hurt guy on the battlefield or a guy that’s struggling with talking to his wife at night.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mick came to me wondering what kind of steps he should be taking as he winds down his military career. Let’s jump in now, as I ask him more about why he was interested in a coaching session.
MICK: So, I feel like I’m at this really interesting place in my career where I feel like as an enlisted guy, it’s not that you’re chasing rank – it’s that you’re chasing the next job that you think will bring more satisfaction and all of that. I feel like I’ve found that job. The tricky part now, I’ve got five more years until I’m able to retire out of the military, and that’s my expectation is to retire. Whenever I look at moving in that direction, what I’m realizing is I spent 15 years to basically get to where I’m at and now I’m going to get a few years to really enjoy it, and then I’m going to be off to the races on a new thing. I guess one of the challenges that I’m facing right now is that I have a level of access, influence and ultimately opportunities for success that I’ve never had before. I’m trying to find a way to synchronize those opportunities and to be very selective about which ones to choose in order to transition out of the military. I feel like I have ideas for how I want to do that, but I feel like I’m really wrestling with how to say no to people whenever they feel like they have a need that I can fill, but that I don’t feel like aligns with those goals. Then I’m having a hard time, I guess, kind of – to be completely honest ­ allowing that to not affect my self-esteem. One of the challenges is that it’s very easy to give too much because you know deep down that you can, but that you’re always, I mean, I’m far more sensitive to it now, but I’m realizing that my family’s going to take a hit and my personal time’s going to take a hit. All of those things take a hit whenever I take more onto my plate than it’s required, even though it looks like another feather in your cap in regards to how well you’re doing. I’m trying to find a way to have a better filter so that I can be brilliant on the basics and then also not overwhelm myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what I’m hearing is being at this place where you now see your exit on the horizon.
MICK: Just terrifying.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like, I don’t know I have spent many, many, many, too many hours that I can ever count driving up the New Jersey turnpike, I95 or anything on I95. It’s when you finally start seeing signs for your exit and you’re like, “oh my gosh, it’s 80 miles away.”
MICK: We’re almost there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, 70, 60, 50, right? You’re almost there. So that’s kind of where you are.
MICK: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re wanting to make sure that the decisions that you make today will ease you off that exit ramp in a way that you actually get to the destination that you’re trying to go to.
MICK: Yes. Yeah, I think that’s a great way to put it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is that right? All right. While at the same time, not sacrificing yourself in the process.
MICK: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, let me ask you this. Do you have a sense of what your exit looks like and what happens after the five years?
MICK: A sense is probably a good way to put it. It’s a general direction. I love coaching. I love that kind of a relationship where you can speak to someone and they are looking to listen. That’s been, honestly, the most rewarding part of being in the military for me has been the personal relationships where I get to invest in people. So, I want to be able to continue to do that, although I don’t really know exactly what that looks like yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, one of the things that I’m going to encourage you to do is to sort of lift out of the specifics of what life after the military will look like in terms of, what am I doing on a day to day basis? I think before zooming into that, it would be helpful to zoom out and to start defining what does success look like after this five year exit? because it sounds like those are the things that are important to you to define it more broadly than what your professional role is.
MICK: That makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, we can start there because I think if we can understand a little bit better start painting the picture of what success looks like, then we can work backwards to determine what are the decisions that you can make today that increase the chances that you’ll actually get to that image of success that you have. And because you mentioned that part of it is you don’t want your self-esteem to be affected because it sounds like in the career that you’ve been in, productivity and being able to crank a lot out and being able to handle a lot. So, let’s talk about that. If you think about five years from now, six years from now, what are the conditions of success for you?
MICK: I think it would look like investing in people in that sort of mentorship role. I would want to have more of that. I would want to be able to have essentially autonomy of my time. I want to have the ability to work when I want to work, and what that really is, is that is really me being able to maximize my family as a priority. Honestly, I enjoy public speaking. I enjoy being able to, I guess, inspire. That’s the real thing that I like to think that I at least have an inkling of potential in, and I would enjoy to be something in regards to that, to have a voice that people want to listen to. Ultimately, honestly, and here’s the one that I’ve just realized over the last few days is that I want to be able to provide opportunities for other veterans specifically, but then also for people in service, not service industry, that’s not really the best way to put it, but law enforcement, EMS, the people that are basically public servants in a very challenging role to be able to provide opportunities for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So, let me play back this picture that you’ve drawn. Having a voice, inspiring others, investing in people as a mentor, having autonomy of time and flexibility, maximizing your family time, providing opportunities for other public servants who really work in hard, challenging, difficult roles, right?
MICK: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: All of those things can be expressed in a number of different ways. In all of that, you also mentioned, “Oh, maybe I’ll be a public speaker.” The public speaker piece is an expression of all of that. Potentially being a coach is an expression of that. You could do that by becoming a teacher. Heck, you can do that just by, not just not trying to belittle it, but you can do that by being a father.
MICK: Yeah. That’s a good point.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this notion of start with what is the impact that you’re trying to make, what is this sense of how you want to express yourself and all the experiences that you’ve had, start with that and what it would look like, and then you can then determine what form does it actually take. So, how does that land with you?
MICK: Very well. I think that feels very affirmational in regards to why I felt frustrated in this a lot, because it feels like you’re trying to define something too rigidly, even though I feel like innately I know what I’m hoping to express, but then every time I try to build a structure to fit it doesn’t ever work because I don’t have enough details and I’m not close enough to it realistic. So now, I think the start with impact, I’ve never thought about it directly from that sort of a perspective.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, you’ve been in a career where I think, my understanding – correct me if I’m wrong – is there’s a pretty rigid structure in terms of career path and roles that you take, right?
MICK: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You don’t go into the military and say, “I’m going to create my role.” I mean, maybe you can, but for the most part, it’s like, no, there’s sort of a step ladder, step function way of advancing, and these are the roles that you take and this is the title and the title doesn’t change and all of this, right?
MICK: Yeah. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is probably the first time from a career standpoint that there is no clear definition. You’re not being told what you need to do next.
MICK: Yes. I agree completely. So, in my childhood, I think we moved 24 times before I turned 18. So, it was very, very unstable in regards to geographical location. So, I know for me, that is one of the things that I really yearned for whenever I got a career is that I was like, hey, I don’t mind working hard, but I don’t want to move my family. The thing that I’ve realized as I’ve gotten older and older is wow, it’s more than just I don’t want to move my family. It’s I want to have a clear expectation. I want to be able to look and see stability, and I think that’s why the military honestly works so well for me is because it is a rigid structure and I know where I fit. This is the first time that I’m kind of growing past what the military has provided. One of the fascinating things about special operations specifically is that you develop a very keen sense of the importance of people and the importance of a network. I have to say I’ve seen my network really explode over the last, I would even say couple years, and so being able to develop these relationships of people that share similar values and have had similar experiences and then being able to transition and not only draw from their experience pool, but also to be able to kind of connect the pieces. So, I think that the network, the ability to look at risk and be okay with it and then honestly, to develop comprehensive plans, that’s a big thing that we do. I feel skilled in it, but the challenge is whenever those factors continue to change and that’s where I yearn for stability and structure and I’m like, “Why can’t I build this?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, right. It’s like, “oh, I want flexibility and autonomy and openness, and being able to do all these things and I want structure.” I say it laughingly, but it’s – and, and it’s a constant balance of the two is what you’re trying to do is how do I optimize all the opportunities as you’ve put it, and at the same time, make sure there’s some stability. So, even understanding what does stability mean for you right now, and what does opportunity mean for you right now will then help you determine what are the boundaries that you need put in place so that you can optimize both.
MICK: It’s funny, right? So, one of the things I like about my job that I don’t really feel like I’ve had up until this point in my career, I took this job about a year ago, is that I know what almost every single day will look like. There’s something deeply innately satisfying about that to be able to look at the next few weeks and be like, I like that. That’s something that I’d see with stability. What I do within those hours at work, I want to be new and exciting. I want to innovate. I want to grapple with challenging issues, but I want to know when I’m clocking out.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I hear that as it’s stability, I hear it also as predictability.
MICK: That’s a great way to put that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. Mick came to me with some broader questions about where he might want to go to after his career in the military is over, but he’s challenged with how to figure out what he wants and how to pursue it given all the competing demands on his time and energy. He’s realized that he has to figure out what to say yes to and what to say no to even when there are lots of exciting opportunities coming his way. He’s also realizing that predictability and stability are important to him and their lies the tension. He’s moving towards something new and different, and yet he wants to have some stability and predictability. So, to move him forward, I invite him to reframe the question he’s been asking himself. Instead of focusing on what do I say yes or no to, I ask him to reframe it to how do I harness the opportunities that are coming my way in a predictable way and in a way that gives me disability I’m yearning for? Let’s dive back in as he explores that question.
MICK: Yeah. Some opportunities are very clear and specific. It’s like, “Hey can you come support this training exercise,” and that’s like a week long, and I know exactly when I’m going to be there. I know exactly what I’m going to do. Then there are other things, like working groups are a great example where we’ll take a complex problem and then a bunch of people will hop on a call and try to talk about it. Those things can be far more nebulous. You could spend just an hour on the call or you could spend 10 hours preparing products for the call and then have to revise that and change that afterwards. Honestly, I think I’ve probably not done the best job and really clearly defining what those more nebulous tasks are actually requiring of me, and then that starts to encroach on my ability to not have to work quote/unquote, “overtime.” Obviously, that doesn’t exist in the military, but in order to kind of put myself into a position where, because I said yes to something, I’m not going to let it fail, but at the same time, it’s going to require far more effort than potentially I’d planned. Those things, I feel like, just suck the life out of me where it’s like the second that I look at the clock and I’m like, “I’m going to be late to getting home,” and expectations are starting to get infringed upon with my family, then that’s where I get frustrated because I feel like I’m taking from them while giving to an organization that obviously I love, but that isn’t my family. I think I struggle with defining the amount of work that I need to put into projects in order to see them succeed, and honestly, I don’t even know if I’ve ever really thought about that up until this conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. In a sense, you’re saying yes without really knowing what you’re saying yes to when you take on these projects. So, with that in mind, what do you think you could be doing when these requests come your way? Which it sounds like there’s a lot of them that do. You’re in demand, MICK. So, when you’re in demand, what do you think you could do when the next call comes? “Hey, can you sit on this taskforce, or can you work this group? Can you talk to this person? Can you lead this project?” What could you do that would help you be able to determine whether or not this aligns with the expectations you have of yourself, of having a bit more of a predictable schedule, some stability, and being able to focus on the things that you want to focus on?
MICK: I think of two things. One, I could be more upfront in my conversation with them and say, okay, now this is what it looks like to me. Is this what it looks like to you? I think that’s rarely a part of that conversation. I think I can definitely do that. I think the second thing is I wrestle with time management at work whenever it comes to blocking off chunks of time for specific projects, and that’s kind of the issue of being the guy in the corner office is that people are always knocking. I think that’s been a part where it’s almost like I don’t know how much time I have to spend, because I’m not really structuring it that well, and so whenever somebody asks for something, I’m like, “Oh, sure, I’ve got the time.” I’m not realizing like, “oh yeah, there’s six things that I didn’t write into my schedule that I should have, or that were nebulous in themselves and don’t really have an easy way to schedule without me just being intentional about it.” I think it really is probably a lot of that. It’s me actually knowing how much of that currency I have to spend, because very regularly I don’t have a solid grasp on that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, doing the work to get more of a solid grasp is where you’re at, right?
MICK: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Aligning around expectations is what you’re talking about. What might be helpful for you here is to also be able to discern between when a request is being made of you and when it’s a demand. Let me explain the difference, or do you know the difference – let me ask you – between a request and a demand?
MICK: I would dare to think that I do. I was thinking a request I can basically say no to and a demand is, yeah, it’s going to happen whether I like it or not.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Exactly. A request, there’s three possible answers. It’s yes, no, or maybe – let’s talk about it this is how we can make it work, right? The demand is it’s non-negotiable, this is what it is. My sense is that particularly as you’ve risen up in your career and the level at which you’re at now, you’re probably receiving way more requests now than you are demands.
MICK: I would agree completely, and honestly, I think in the past I mostly received demands. So, it’s almost a habit of saying yes, more than it is say a conscious thought process of, oh, maybe I don’t have to do this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Exactly. So, it’s really, how should we put it, exercising your ear, to, A, discern is it a request or a demand, and if it’s a request, then how do I respond? So, that if you do say, yes, it’s aligned with the conditions that you need to make it work for you, and it’s aligned with the conditions that they need to make it work for them. I think the second thing that you’re bringing up is, “But, you know, even when I take things on, I’m actually not really quite sure if I have room to do it.” Which becomes the capacity question.
MICK: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you sort of have to proactively look at, well, how much capacity do I actually have? How much can I take on, and be on top of that. It’s no different, you talked about moving a number of times as you were younger. Similarly, I moved a lot as well. To this day I still think about, okay, let me look at my suitcase. How much room is there exactly? Let me not over-pack it because the room is the room is the room. Your capacity is your capacity and you can try to push it to its limit, but at some point there is going to be a limit.
MICK: Yeah. I think that’s the part that is so challenging for me is that I’m this voice and advocate for wellness, and in telling people about, “Hey, like this is what a healthy life balance should look like.” Then the one area that I consistently kind of overwhelm my capacity is in work, whenever I feel like I’m trying to give to other people. I mean, just like it’s very easy to look at rigid tasks, like, “hey, I’ve really got to write this evaluation. Okay, well, that’s going to take X amount of time.” What you can’t plan for is the fact that one of your sailors just started having an issue with his wife or just wanted to fight one of the other guys or whatever. Then it’s like, okay, well then that time gets encroached upon by something that is urgent. So, it’s almost like programming flexibility, is also something that I really wrestle with because I think I can keep this within capacity, but then if any random thing happens, then all of a sudden the whole system gets kind of thrown off. I don’t feel like I’m good at planning for that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s the thing, you plan for the things that you can control. You leave space for the things that you can’t. So, what you know is that some of these things are going to jump off, as you just said. There will be fires. It’s almost like every day when I drive my kids to school, we pass by a firehouse and on almost any given day, there’s a couple of the firefighters sitting in front, if the weather’s good, they’re sitting in front of the firehouse. To any person, they might think they’re not doing anything. I see it differently. They’ve planned for the potential that there will be a fire, and so, they’ve created capacity by having a couple of people actually being able to just sit in front of the firehouse waiting. They’ve created the capacity for what they know will happen. What they don’t know is when it’s going to happen, but there’s always somebody on standby. So, I use that to say to you, what is your standby time that allows space for you to be able to physically, mentally and emotionally respond to these emergencies that pop off in your realm, in your work?
MICK: So, I instituted two-hour lunches almost as soon as I showed up. I think that I look at those two hour lunches like that, where either a lot of times I’ll go for a run or whatever during lunch, but then that’s also my extra time for doing counselings or for correcting someone or those sorts of issues, or even just a good time just to walk around the building and chat with folks. So, I have created that, and I feel like that’s worked pretty well. I think the other challenge that I’ve faced recently is that I’ve traveled quite a bit. I would say out the last seven or eight weeks, I’ve traveled for about four of it. Then the challenge that I get is that whenever I start traveling or I’m doing something else, then you kind of accrue all of this extra work that’s not getting done, and then you’re coming back. Then all of a sudden I’m using that extra space that I created to try to catch up, and then that’s getting in the way of other things. It just feels like the mountain of tasks just continues to build. Honestly, I think that’s been the most recent stressor that I’ve been dealing with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, here’s the thing. You plan for predictability as much as you can, and you accept the fact that it’s not always going to be predictable and that those moments when things like travel happens or an emergency happens, or whatever it is that kind of takes you away from your regular cadence of activity, that those things are temporary. I liken it to sounds like you run from what you said, right?
MICK: I do. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know if you’ve ever done any long distance running like marathons or, or anything like that.
MICK: I’m trying to do a 100-miler this year. We’ll see if actually comes through.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh my god, okay. Here I am saying a meager marathon and you’re doing a hundred miler. So, I mean, look, the hundred-miler that you’re going to do is a one-time thing.
MICK: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: But the predictability is the training that you do leading up to the hundred-miler.
MICK: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: But that a hundred miler will be a one-time thing that you do. It’s going to happen. It’s going to start and it’s going to end, and then you’ll go back to whatever it is that you were doing. You are holding that at the same time as the predictability of the day in, day out training. The reason I’m bringing this up, Mick, is that things are going to happen. You can’t even necessarily schedule for them to happen, even though you do these two-hour lunches to have the spaciousness. It’s more knowing and having confidence that when something comes up such as travel, having the confidence that when you come back, you will be able to catch up and you will make the space to catch up and you will plan for that.
MICK: Honestly, one of the things that’s funny about having to have confidence is that most people would say that I am an extremely confident person, and I think that’s a part of just what comes with the job. That’s how you can embrace risk – is by being like, “well, I’m super confident in what I bring to the table.” I think what’s hard, especially in a new role, is feeling like you’re not as confident as you have been in the past, and so, it’s like you say that and in my head, I’m like, “you’re absolutely right,” and then there’s a part of me that’s saying, “Why aren’t you confident? You should be confident. How dare you not be confident?” You know what I mean?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, why should you be? I mean, I don’t know. I don’t know if you should be, but why is that such a “should” in your head that you should be when it’s something completely new to you?
MICK: I think it’s one of the challenges that we face. I don’t want to go as dramatic as to say that it’s a fallacy, but it’s this, you kind of robe yourself with invincibility in a way in order to do dangerous things where you just say I’m as trained as I possibly can be and whenever I jump out of this airplane, there are only so many things I can control, and then you accept it. There’s a level of acceptance where you just say, yes, I might die doing this and then you accept it and then you move. There’s something about that that it becomes this mindset that permeates everything in life. It’s hard for me to acknowledge that I have aspects of transitioning out of the military that are scary to me because I am so used to being the brave one. I’m so used to exemplifying that to the guys that work for me, to embracing that with the work that you do and the processes that you go through. So, to be in a place to where I actually feel like I am being vulnerable and recognizing that in an area of my performance is really hard. It’s super easy for me to be vulnerable about my personal past and being empathetic, and it’s hard to do that in the area of performance because it feels so like you must be a performer, you must do this effectively. There is no other option. I think that that rigidity, honestly, I think it’s pretty stifling in a way to where you’re just willing to be real with who you are and maybe the things that you’re not so good at.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What’s coming up for me is, how would you define what “performing” – and I’m using quotations – what that is now versus what it was before?
MICK: I think what’s so hard about it is that what it used to be before, it was very straightforward. It was you need to be able to shoot a gun really well. You need to never be scared. You need to be extremely strong. You need to be smart and reflexive to the needs of the team and doing all those things, and obviously I was far from perfect in executing any of those. I would dare to say that I was good enough. So whenever I look at performance now, you spend your whole time not really being a leader in my field. You influence it a lot, but you are very rarely, truly responsible for the development of other people. It’s almost like being a specialist. You have your area of expertise and you do that thing well. The challenge is that essentially whenever you become a chief in our community, you take on that role where I went from having really a handful of people that worked for me, but they kind of worked in different places and I didn’t really see them a lot, so it wasn’t like that day to day engagement, to becoming a chief, within a couple months taking this new job, and now I have 25 direct reports, half of which I see on a day to day basis. It’s this whole new kind of realm. It’s a realm I’m passionate about, so I feel like I’ve been able to garner a measure of success in it, and I feel like I’ve been able to do a decent job and build some pretty strong relationships, but at the same time, it’s like I don’t have those same rigid tasks. I used to know,” hey, if I can bench press this much and run this fast, then that was success. If I can pass this shooting qualification, then that is success.” Then you show up and it’s like, okay, cool. What does success look like in mentorship? I think that’s strong relationships. I think that’s people being willing to talk to me about their problems, and all of a sudden, it becomes far more nebulous. The military has metrics for everything, but a lot of those metrics have a hard time accurately calculating buy-in or comfortability and communication, those kinds of things. We have like, oh, everyone’s vaccinated, good job, but we don’t have, are your people satisfied? Are you using your people well? Those are the challenges that I now feel responsible for, that whenever we have issues in that people look to me and say, “Okay, Chief, show us how to fix this.” I kind of sit back and then I make my phone calls and I reach out to my mentors and I try to go through it, but there’s not really an operator’s manual like there used to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, there’s not.
MICK: All of a sudden, I’m just grappling with – I’m going to do the things that I feel like are my strengths, but I’m also keenly aware that I have a lot of weaknesses, and I think that’s one of those underlying kind of uncertainties. I would even dare to say that they are fears, is that my strengths would be good enough, but my weaknesses essentially would be the things where I fail people. I think that’s the scary thing for me is that I feel like I really care about people and I believe in being an advocate for people. There’s part of me that is very, very afraid that I will fail someone, like a young sailor who is essentially vulnerable and that I won’t protect him from that effectively. So, yeah, I think I just said a lot, but yeah, that’s generally where my brain goes when it comes to performance is how do I, not the organization, how do I define my success in a way that is still good for the organization, but is also good for me?
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in the coaching conversation, I had us both pause to take a breath because there’s a lot he had just unpacked. Sometimes you need that moment of pause to digest it all. MICK came in wanting to figure out what’s next on his career path and how to manage his time accordingly, but what he uncovered is that underlying it all is his discomfort in shifting from having concrete tasks that he’s responsible for with measurable outcomes, to the more nebulous work of leading particularly when it comes to his people. Like many who move into leadership roles, he’s looking for something to grasp onto that will make him feel like he’s being successful. But for Mick, I had a sense there was something a little deeper at play that was causing this discomfort for him. Let’s dive back in as I test out my hypothesis with him. So, first of all, there is no operator manual, as you said, and I’m sorry, I don’t have it either. What that means is huge opportunity for you to define it, for you to define what those metrics are, what it means to have a team that you feel you’ve done good by. So, that’s one. I think the second thing is you talk a lot about, or you’ve mentioned a few times and used the word protecting your people. Again, I don’t have full, full knowledge of being in the military and being deployed, particularly in hardship areas, but I would imagine that what it means to protect someone in those environments really is a life or death situation. So, you’re applying that in your current environment and holding this metric of protection, and I’m curious around your efforts to protect your people versus your efforts to protect your people as a way of protecting yourself from failing.
MICK: Ooh, that one hits pretty hard. I think that’s actually a very interesting way to put it because once again, I think you measure yourself off of performance so rigidly in a career that has very rigid guidelines for performance. Then I’ve transitioned to a place where it’s far more nebulous, and now I think that there is a very real aspect of that, that if I fail someone that not only will I fail that person, but that I will fail and it will be known by others. That feels like a blow to my pride. That feels like me taking a hit to that confidence that I prize so highly. That’s a complex one right there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, there’s a bit of a paradox here, Mick, because on the one hand based on our conversation so far, I see you as this advocate and champion of others. You used words like, “I want to inspire them,” and when you think about inspiring somebody, it’s about moving them forward. You think about the root word of the word “inspire…” it’s in spirit, like you want to kind of move them forward into something that might not be secure. It’s like, let’s go.
MICK: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then the paradox to me is the approach that you take, or the posture that you also take is I want to protect them, which protecting is very constricting. It’s actually fear-based. It closes off. It says, “let’s just move within this little area, because if we go there, what might happen?” To me, I think you are at a place of there’s a shift around what is the leadership belief that you want to hold as you move forward into this next stage where it’s off of the battlefield, and as you put it, where you’re sitting now, and then more importantly as you move into this exit stage. Are you leading from a place of fear which can then create kind of a protective type of approach, or are you leading from a place of dare I say, and this is not meant to be religious in any way, but from a place of faith, because when you think about what faith is, it’s the belief in the unknown.
MICK: Yeah. So, it’s funny because I feel like there’s almost, like, a dichotomy going on right there, and I can see it in my relationships. So, one of the other very unique things about where I work is that we have people that are fully qualified, who take a couple of years of extremely hard training, and then they’re able to do this job. Then I have other people that we call candidates who are trying to become that thing. I can see the different perspectives on both sides because with the candidates, kind of my personal quote is serve excellently, suffer well. So, whenever they’re like, “Hey, I’m intimidated by doing this. I’m afraid of doing that,” and I tell them there are only so many opportunities you have to actually suffer well, and this can be one of them if you choose to take it. I believe that. I believe in the growth that can come from that. Then on the flip side the guys who are fully qualified, I feel like a lot of what I spend my time doing is trying to teach them how to protect themselves from all the mistakes that I made. I can definitely see how both of those things are important, but at the same time, how there seems to be almost, like, a friction in regards to being able to consistently do that effectively. I was challenged earlier this week by having to discipline a guy that I looked at and he had gone through some personal issues fairly recently, but then there was a very clear metric of performance that he did not meet. Basically I had to sit him down and give him a hard talking to, and in my head, I saw myself and I was like, “Man, did I coddle this guy because of the personal stuff I knew he was going through? Is that what led to this?” Now I have to be the guy dropping a hammer to be like, “Hey man, if you want to be here, you need to prove it to me.” I got to say, I feel like both of those drives feel very natural and just like they’re just in me. I feel like I’m grappling with how to express those effectively.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it’s also not only how do you express those effectively, but how do you do that at scale? Because you now have a much larger organization that you’re dealing with. When you feel that friction, when you feel that tension, what I would suggest to you is that it might be a signal that the way you’re defining your role is not quite necessarily what’s needed, or what’s best going to serve the organization or your people or whoever it is you’re dealing with. So, what does that mean? I think it’s really interesting that over the course of a conversation, you have interchangeably used the words being a mentor, or gone back and forth between, “I’m a mentor, that’s who I am,” and “I think I want to coach, but not an executive coach,” cetera. I think it’s really interesting because I think that what you have done for a very long time is mentor others, and mentoring others is about taking your own personal experiences, which you have an amazing story and experience that you bring to the table. Using your experience and what you’ve done well, where you’ve “failed”, in quotation marks, to guide others. So, that’s one, and I think you’ve done that extraordinarily well. Then there’s being a coach as a manager. Let’s not even talk about coaching the way I do it, but a coach is a manager. As a coach, as a manager, what you’re doing is creating the conditions and holding the space so that your people can learn what it is that it’s going to take for them to be able to succeed. So, it’s not about your story. It’s not about, “This is what worked for me. This is what I did therefore,” or “This is how it happened to me, and now I’m concerned that’s what’s going to happen to you.” It’s about being able to see the person for where they are, and then being able to say, “Okay, this is where you are. Where do you want to go? What choices do you have in front of you? Let me help you figure out what the different paths are that you can take, what the different decisions are that you can make, the different strategies you can take. Let me show you the different ways of doing something, but ultimately the responsibility lies with you.” So there’s a bit of, I think, as you scale in leadership, being responsible for coaching your people, but not feeling so responsible to the outcome that it then moves you into this protective mechanism.
MICK: Ooh, this is the first time in this conversation where I’ve actually felt uncomfortable. So, thank you for that. I mean, I think you’re right. I think that’s what makes that so hard. I think that in my early career, I felt very vulnerable. I ran into some significant issues right after I finished our very hard training pipeline. Then I had leaders that I felt were not as protective as they should be, and a big part of that was my naivety of youth and not understanding the organization, not understanding the values that they were trying to instill in me, but it left a very indelible mark on the way that I wanted to make people feel. I think that’s one of the challenges that I think that I might face is that I’ve had a lot of people tell me that I’m very in tune with my emotions, and I think the challenge with that is that that’s not really the military way. That’s not a normal and really popular approach in many ways, and so I know that sometimes I wonder if I feel too much and it kind of triggers that protective instinct to where I want to be able to shield someone from that suffering that is actually a healthy part of growth. I guess I’m struggling with how to establish I guess, a definition or a boundary in regards to that and what that would look like. I don’t know if that’s me trying to be more introspective about when I’m feeling emotionally triggered by something, or if maybe there’s more of a generalized rule for the road.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I don’t think there’s a generalized rule for the road.
MICK: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I do think that what you’ve hit on is how do I establish a boundary? The boundary is really not for the other. The boundary is not, let me place a boundary so that my team members don’t have any more problems or don’t come to me with problems. I’m only going to make, like, one office hour a week. Therefore, if it doesn’t fit in that office hour, I won’t get any more of these things that I have to deal with. The boundary is really not on the other. The boundary is on yourself and how much do you actually need to give to feel like you’re supporting them?
MICK: I think the easy answer is everything. That’s the hard thing. That is one of the greatest things about the military and also one of the hardest things about the military is that there is a feeling of as, as Jocko Willink likes to put it, “extreme ownership,” that the best leaders engage their people in a holistic perspective, and you can see that become a very toxic sort of approach that is stifling and overwhelming and inappropriate, but you also see that with really great leaders where they genuinely care about the lives, the entire lives of their people. I think that that’s the challenge, is that whenever you are a people person, like myself, you want to be engaged in those things. You want to have a pulse on those things, because I know how that’s going to affect their work, and I also know that’s going to affect how I put them in positions of stress. Sometimes I think that I’m too sensitive in that. That I see something going on and I say, “Oh man, let’s stop everything to try to deal with this thing, even though, one, it’s not my specialty and two, it’s realistically probably something that’ll buff out if I just allowed them the space and the time and the empowerment with resources to deal with it on their own.” It’s like being a helicopter parent. I feel like that’s what I’m doing in some of these situations where I’m like, “Okay, I’ve got you,” and it’s like, “Man, let that little bird fly.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, right. Exactly. It’s not a one or the other, actually. It’s trying to be all those things and situationally figuring out what does this particular situation need from me at this time? Does it require me to helicopter or does it require me to take a step back and let them fly? The way you make that decision is because you are so vested in terms of the growth of your people, what is going to best serve them in their growth, which might not necessarily be what best serves them in the short term and also may not what necessarily be what serves you in the short term of your desire to help relieve the sufferer.
MICK: I think in kind of a subtle way, when I look at people, there’s part of me that maybe catastrophizes where they’re at almost as, like, a protective mechanism so that I’m not shocked and surprised again, even though I know, realistically, there’s only so much that you can do for that. I know the equation, but it’s still, like, this emotional underpinning that if I fail at this thing, that not only could it be bad, it could be terrible. Honestly, I mean, realistically, that’s what we do in the military. Every plan that we make is based off of the worst possible outcome, and then we plan for that and we train for that, and then most of the time it doesn’t happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m suggesting is that as you lead to think about are there other ways you can lead over and beyond the protective approach that you’ve taken so far. That is one approach. It’s not to get rid of it. It’s not to get rid of it. It’s more so that it has worked for you because of the culture that you’ve been in, because that tends to be the predominant way of doing things, and now that you’re leading at the scale that you’re at now, as well as when you move forward, post your military career, there are other approaches that can amplify your objective, which is to inspire, motivate, grow people. What’s clear to me is you are somebody that is driven by purpose. So if you could start thinking about what are other ways that you can lead that support this overarching purpose of growing your people over and beyond leading by protection, what would that look like? We could do that right now. If I had to say, hey, you have multiple muscles, leadership muscles, one of them is leading by protecting, fill in the blank, what are other ways that you could lead by?
MICK: Challenging. That’s the first one that comes to my mind is giving guys challenges to overcome. That’s the biggest one. Actually, that is absolutely the biggest one. I feel like that’s always what made me feel like I thrived was overcoming some sort of thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would that require of you to be able to lead in that way? How would it look different in terms of how you approach things than the way you do now?
MICK: I think I would have to more clearly articulate goals. I think one of the easy ways of leading by protection is that sometimes it’s kind of hard to see what right looks like, but it’s really easy to see what wrong looks like. So, protecting is preventing what’s wrong. Whereas, looking at what right looks like – well, I mean, there’s all kinds of metrics that you can formulate for that, but I think that that’s what I would see the challenging is: “Hey, I believe that you’re weak in this area,” whether that’s physical fitness or medical knowledge or whatever, or even more of the softer skills that guys don’t really appreciate early in their careers, like public speaking or networking, and then drawing those guys into those situations that would allow. That would take more time and more intention from me. Although I know that I could do it. I know that could do it well, but it’s almost like having one perspective that is overarching, that protective side, and then being intentional about shifting that to the other, the challenging approach, that actually determines in my mind how I spend my time during my day. Which honestly… I mean, going back to the whole purpose thing – I mean, I can see how that would also be more consistently fulfilling because whenever you’re trying to always protect, honestly, you’re always looking for somebody to fight. You’re always looking for somebody to step out of line so that you can go in and fix a problem. I don’t think that’s really the most healthy long term strategy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So, we’ve talked about things at a number of levels, and I know you came in with the question of almost like, “what do I say yes to, and what do I say no to,” right?
MICK: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to be honest with you, what I thought we were going to get to was like, “oh, well, what’s on your plate? What should you be saying yes to? What should you be saying no to?” I think where we’ve landed is what you need to be saying yes to are other approaches to leading and other paths to achieving this vision of success that you have for yourself in terms of the impact that you want to have on your people. What you need to say no to is only being kind of a one-note in terms of the way that you can make that impact.
MICK: I think one of the things that I wrestle with is that at the 15-year mark in the military, you’ve done a lot. A lot of the guys that work for me are far more junior, usually about a decade at least at a minimum my junior. So, I think I look back at my story and the greatest challenges were all the personal ones. Like, what does it look like to try to figure out if you’re going to get a divorce or not? What does it look like to have people close to you pass away? It’s almost like I take that my perspective of being a seasoned guy, and then I apply it to someone that not only doesn’t even know what those stressors are at that point, it’s almost like presenting people with things that they should be afraid of. It’s like, ah, that only goes so far.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, here’s the thing. I’m going to share something. I love to work out and it’s an outlet for me. I enjoy it. Unlike a lot of people who see it as a chore, I find a lot of passion. I remember I used to spend a lot of time trying to convince my friends that they should do the same and I would list all the reasons. Probably one of the wisest people in my life, and the person who challenges me probably the most of my life, i.e., my husband, once said to me, “Did it ever occur to you that they might just not want to do it? That, like, all that passion that you have, keep it for yourself. You do it.” I was like, “Why? Why? Why is that the case?” So, I’m joking about it, but here’s the thing, your work is your work. As you said, your work is your work. Your experience is your experience. Does it inform you in terms of how you are with your people? Absolutely, but you’ve got to let their work be their work, their path be their path. What you can do is stand right next to them as they go through it, as they go through their challenges. You can guide, you can coach, you can mentor, and it’s still their work, their challenge, their path to go through. That’s the difference. That actually is a huge distinction between being the doer and being the leader. In your case, usually when we’re talking about this, we’re talking about like delegating tasks. Like, oh, you need to stop doing the task. You need to sort of lift up. In your case, the task is around them being able to get through these challenges. So, you’ve got to lift from being a doer in terms of almost like doing the emotional work for them –
MICK: Oh man, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: – of the challenges and more being a leader around that.
MICK: Man, I’m going to write that down. “Don’t do the emotional work.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think we can bring this to a close, but I’d love to hear in the simplest way possible for you what your key takeaways are and what you’re leaving the conversation with.
MICK: I would say that it is a need to move from a fear-based mentality to a more faith-based because that really aligns with the direction that we’re trying to take this, to go from that protective approach to a more challenging approach, and then also aligning my future vision, the one that I’m driving towards in five years and then recognizing that with that vision in mind, I can then make those tactical level decisions and be more consistent with them in order to actually reach that vision well. Honestly, I think that’s really how I would sum all this up.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Very good.
MICK: Thanks, Muriel. I cannot express to you how valuable this time has been for me. I really appreciate
MURIEL WILKINS: Good. Good. I’m really glad, really glad. When Mick reached out for coaching, he wanted to work through what he does next after his military career. But as we got into the coaching session, he realized that the real work starts now before he even takes that next step. His work is not just tactical in terms of what practical steps he needs to take. It’s also an inside job of realigning, his perspective and approach to better support the purpose that he has of helping others. My coaching conversation with Mick went deeper than most clients on this show. Why? Because my job is to meet my clients where they are and help them see what paths they can take to move forward from there. But let me be clear, coaching is not therapy, and while Mick, like many of my clients, brought a whole lifetime of experiences to the coaching, some of them traumatic, it’s not my role to dig into those experiences and help my clients make sense of them, and in some cases heal from them. Rather, my work is to help Mick see where he is now and where he wants to be in the future, and make the bridge between the two with as much ease as possible. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and that’s a wrap on this season as well. We’re taking a break over the summer and I’ll be back with more episodes this fall. In the meantime, stay in touch by joining me and many others at my Coaching Real Leaders, community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. You can join at
coachingrealleaderscommunity.com
. You can also find me in my newsletter on LinkedIn @MurielWilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nate Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at
coachingrealleaders.com
. Of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, may you be well.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 4
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS:
Coaching Real Leaders
is back this fall. Join me as I coach leaders from around the globe as they tackle some of the toughest professional problems they’re facing at work today. You’ll listen in on real coaching sessions, addressing issues like: How do I make a career change later in life?
SPEAKER 2: I did it before, so I want to do it again. That combination of an excellent professional record that is aligned with what is required in this position’s relationship-building, cultural, and international competencies, a knowledge of the organizational DNA that I have there. And that is definitely a competitive edge.
MURIEL WILKINS: How do I transition from a corporate job to an entrepreneurial one and make the most of it?
SPEAKER 3: There’s a mindset shift that needs to happen, and maybe this just naturally happens over time. The more you are out of corporate environment and you are in a consultant role, you become less focused on the, “I’ve got to prove myself.” But truth be told, I think I was like that in the corporate environment, as well. Every year was a chance to be promoted. Every year was a chance to smash another goal.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how do I better advocate for myself when I don’t have a clear career path ahead of me?
SPEAKER 4: I think the conversation which I have not had is: To get to that executive level, which I’ve aiming for, what do I need to do? What are the stepping stones to get there? If I continue to deliver in my current role, will that lead me there one day? Or if not, then maybe have some sort of a session… What could be the other things I could be doing to position myself to get there?
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m excited to share these leaders’ journeys with you when
Coaching Real Leaders
returns with season four this October. Subscribe now, wherever you get your podcasts. And if you’d like to dive deeper, join me in the Coaching Real Leaders Community, where we have live Q&As and discussions on leadership coaching in different episodes. You can join at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 3
Year: 2022
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins and season 3 of
Coaching Real Leaders
is just around the corner, which means you can once again join me behind the closed doors of real coaching sessions, as leaders from around the globe address the issues standing in their way. This season, we’ll hear from leaders facing challenges. Like, how do I move from being a subject matter expert to a business leader?
SPEAKER 1: It’s a gift and a curse in some ways because the career which I built in this company has propelled in some ways of home by what I have achieved in this specific area. But it’s also got to a place where it defines me as a person in terms of what I bring to the table. I genuinely kind of would think there is a lot more I could offer.
MURIEL WILKINS: How do I hold my team – and ultimately, myself – more accountable?
SPEAKER 2: I need to stop doing it all myself and bring this talented team along for the ride and actually let go. I’ve always been one who gives trust, yet my actions tell my team I think that I don’t trust them because I’m not giving them anything. If I gave them something – a plan – then I think I can hold them accountable and set clearer expectations.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how do I show I can do more than the career track I’m on?
SPEAKER 3: I could just follow that track and be here thirty years from today, doing the same kind of job, but in a different way, and I realized that that’s not what I want to do. I want more than that. I eventually want to have people who I’m working under me that I can mentor and coach, and grow into, you know, a real organization within the organization, if you will.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m excited to share these leaders’ journeys with you when
Coaching Real Leaders
returns with Season 3 this May. Subscribe now wherever you get your podcasts, and if you’d like to dive deeper, join me in the Coaching Real Leaders Community where we’ll have live debriefs of different episodes. You can join at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com.

