
================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Communicate With More Tact?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Valentino to protect his confidentiality. He works in the technology space and is looking to advance his career, but he’s taken a bit of an unconventional move to get there.
VALENTINO: I’m not in the leadership role. I actually took a step back. I felt there’s some things I needed to do to enhance my career, and in order for me to take several steps forward, I had to take a step back, move back into an individual contributor role.
MURIEL WILKINS: Valentino reached out because he knows where he wants to go, but feels like there’s some gaps he needs to close and skills he needs to work on to get there, and work is not something he shies away from.
VALENTINO: I grew up with very strict parents. It’s typical immigrant parents, early rising, following strict disciplines. When you’re doing something, you do it right or you don’t do it at all. So I think my background, it’s a very disciplined-based background. Then in terms of my career, I did not grow up in the technology industry. I grew up in a different discipline. However, the trajectory of my career has informed the different roles that I’ve been in the technology industry, and I think it’s been very useful and helpful because I tend to see things from a different perspective. It’s very refreshing in some ways. It also informs leadership as well as myself and my teams to make decisions.
MURIEL WILKINS: Valentino wants to make sure he’s developing the skills he needs to move ahead and brings a few concerns to our session today about his expertise and the way he interacts with others, but in order to look deeper at his challenges, I also wanted to know more about what outcomes he’s driving to. So I started by asking him about why he took that step back and what are the longer term goals that he’s pursuing.
VALENTINO: Career-wise, I think my next role will have a C in front of it. I’ve been one step below the C level or the executive roles. However, I tend to bump into different ceilings, for whatever reason, and that’s really why I’m here today. From my perspective, I felt that the reason why I’m not getting where I need to be is because I’m lacking a technical acumen. I have the business acumen, I have leadership skills. However, I sometimes just bump into things. So my theory is it’s either technical or it’s the ability to communicate effectively, getting my message across effectively.
MURIEL WILKINS: Getting your message across effectively. So you mentioned that’s why you’re here. So articulate that for me a little bit. Why are you here?
VALENTINO: So, I’m here to answer a question, and the question is, “How does Valentino effectively deliver a message without causing angst, dissonance, confusion or feel as if I am being disrespectful to leadership? I have gotten feedback in the past that I sometimes tend to kick up, kiss across. I have a real challenge with leadership who I consider is not up to the task or inept. I have a serious challenge with it, and I do not always communicate effectively.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So you’ve had a career that you transitioned into from in terms of going into technology. You’ve done relatively well recently or I’m not sure what the timing is, but it sounds like you took a step back to build some skills that would then prepare you for that next level leadership, and that happened after or as a result of hitting certain bumps in the road, and there’s two hypotheses for those bumps. One is, is it technical acumen, and the second, is it something around the way that you communicate?
VALENTINO: That’s spot on.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the technical acumen, obviously, I can’t help on because I know absolutely nothing about the field that you’re in, but you’re looking to drill down on the communication aspect of it and make sure that you are effectively communicating, and it sounds like specifically with those who are higher up than you. Is that right?
VALENTINO: That’s correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, tell me a little bit more about the feedback that you received.
VALENTINO: Well, the feedback that I received is you make very good points. However, sometimes when you come across, you have to be very careful in terms of how you communicate your point across the leadership, especially those who are several rungs of the ladder from you.
MURIEL WILKINS: What did you take that to mean?
VALENTINO: I took that to mean that, yes, I did make a good point. However, the delivery could have been more diplomatic, it could have been softer. It was very unambiguous, and I think sometimes in my quest to be unambiguous, it comes across as being disrespectful or condescending.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is this feedback that you’ve received primarily with those who are more senior than you or does it also apply to other stakeholder groups, your peers or folks more junior than you?
VALENTINO: No, I think it’s usually the leadership. My peers, we get along very well. I’ve been on teams in my recent move. I’ve had my former team members calling me, begging me to come back. I provide mentoring to those folks because they trust me the way I communicate to them. I think it’s with less of a, I think, anger behind it or whatever it is. I think the struggle I have with leadership is my perspective is if you’re a leader, it comes with certain aspects, meaning you are held to a higher standard. From my perspective, if you’re not carrying out your remit or you’re not being responsible with the position given to you or the position you’ve earned, then I have a challenge with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s the challenge?
VALENTINO: The challenge is I think if I am going to report to you or you’ll delegate words to me, I struggle with trusting someone who does not have the requisite skills or is, again, in my words, inept or should be in the role that they’re in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So you don’t trust people who you, particularly leaders who you feel are not up to par in terms of the skills that they should have?
VALENTINO: I wouldn’t say I don’t trust them. I think it’s confidence. I don’t have the confidence in following a leader who does not understand the path, does not have a North Star or is unable to recognize that you’re in unchartered territory, which I think it’s okay if you do not have the chops, so to speak, to carry out your remit and you display vulnerability, I think I would have more confidence in you. In my mind, if you’re not able to do what’s expected of you, it’s going to have negative consequences down the line, not only for the team or the leader, but for the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I want to imagine that I’m a fly in the room, fly on the wall when whatever it is that goes down goes down because I have a feeling something goes down, right? So play the scene back for me. You’re in the meeting room, you’re in the presence of a leader or some leaders who aren’t up to par, you’re losing confidence, you have to deliver a message. What does the delivery sound like? Feel free to give me an example if you want.
VALENTINO: Let me provide some context. We’re shifting strategy. So we know that the current strategy that we have in place is not working. So we’re changing the way we do things. So we had a call. However, the delivery of the message was very ambiguous. Following that call, each leader within their silo had separate calls to explain what the leader intended to say. So today in the meeting I said, “That’s not the best way to communicate your message.” Then I went into a rant, I would say, of saying, “Well, perhaps better preparation was needed so that the message is deliberate effectively and we would see less water cooler talks. We would see less breakout or silo sessions, which is a drag on productivity. So, what are we going to do to fix the situation?” Immediately after I said that, I could not edit those words because they were already out of my mouth, and I knew that he understood my intention, but again, in a room of peers and other leaders, it was probably not the most effective way of delivering a message.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what was your intention?
VALENTINO: Well, I think my challenge is during those water cooler talks, some of the leaders participate and then we all sit in the meeting and we’re faced with the problem. We know what the problem is, and no one wants to address the elephants in the room. I felt that in order for us to address the problem, we have to put it in front of us and we have to discuss it. Feelings may get hurt, but the purpose of the meeting is not to discuss feelings, it’s to address the problem, solve the problem, move on, and have a successful organization. I think no one chose to do that, and it was very frustrating, and so I forced the issue.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what I hear right now is how you feel about what happened. What I’m not hearing still is what was your intention.
VALENTINO: The intention was to address the issue that was at hand so we could move on.
MURIEL WILKINS: So we could move on. So what would’ve been a successful outcome?
VALENTINO: I think a successful outcome would’ve been, “Let’s talk about that. Let’s drill into that. Let’s figure out how we can save the company money and be productive and perhaps even provide training to our leadership so that the next time around when a new strategy is communicated, it’s communicated in a manner that’s effective, it drives the point home, and we don’t have to perseverate on the issue.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it sounds like what you wanted as an outcome is for those senior leaders to explore different ways of doing this, delivering the message that they had to deliver in the future.
VALENTINO: Yes. I think that’s part of it. I think it’s also about how do we as an organization move forward and can we identify the hurdles that are in front of us in order not to be unproductive, in order not to lose money because I think if we cannot communicate effectively, then we’re going to continue to spin our wheels.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it’s interesting that you were focused and holding your leadership team accountable for how to communicate effectively, and yet you’re here asking, how do you communicate effectively.
VALENTINO: Yes. I’m not-
MURIEL WILKINS: No judgment. I just think-
VALENTINO: It’s funny because I recognized that I have this problem is when one of my mentees asked me a similar question. I know I could empathize with her, but I did not have an answer because the very thing that you’re trying to avoid is exactly what you’re doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I think there’s a bit of a mirror reflection that’s happening, and I’m glad you’re here because I think maybe let’s start with looking at you rather than others around this aspect of communicating effectively, which is what you’re doing. So that’s what we’re going to do. Let me ask you this. What do you see as your role relative to… I’m just going to take a step back here because it seems to be particularly happening with people in authority who you feel are not deserving of the authority that they have. So what do you see as your role relative to that dynamic?
VALENTINO: That’s a very good question, and I don’t know if I have the answer, but going in, I think reflecting back, I’ve always been in situations where I could have said something and the outcome would’ve been different, and I said nothing, and it was a disaster. I recently read an article about Bob Ebeling. I think he died a year or a while back. He was the guy who worked with the Challenger. He knew what was wrong. He said nothing. I’m not comparing myself to a rocket scientist, but I think I would say it’s regret of seeing that we’re going down a path that is undesirable and staying on the train without pulling the horn or initiating a course correction.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here. Valentino reached out because he feels as though the way he communicates with the people above him might be hindering his ability to advance in his career. He knows what he wants and aims to communicate directly, but it’s not always coming off the way he wants. In evaluating his options, right now he feels like he can really only do one of two things, continue speaking up when he disagrees at the risk of negatively impacting others or keep quiet. Something Valentino said really stuck with me: “The very thing you’re trying to avoid is the thing that you are doing.” Let’s keep this in mind as we think through how he can communicate more effectively and still meet his goals. We’ll jump back in now to look at those two options as I ask him whether they are really his only options or is there another path. So are those your only two options to say something in a way that makes those folks feel a certain type of way or say nothing?
VALENTINO: No, I think both are counterproductive. I think the third option would be to perhaps question in a way that’s constructive, not destructive, engage in a way that you don’t necessarily curse the dark, you light a candle, in a way that’s diplomatic, in a way that others will find it receptive. So I think that would be a third option.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So why don’t you do that?
VALENTINO: That’s a great question. I think reflecting back on it, hindsight is 2020, but I didn’t look at it that way. I’m an avid reader. I love to read, and there are several books that I’ve read that talk about that, but when you’re in the heat of the moment, and I think sometime emotions, the amygdala gets hijacked, you tend to lose focus and you tend not, I tend not to focus on the outcome rather than focusing on the moment. Maybe it’s just an emotional reaction instead of responding in a way that’s much more productive and has much better long-term consequences.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, it happens to all of us, and I think that part of it is recognizing when you do go into that emotional hijack and you go into reactive mode, what are you reacting to and what is driving you at that point? So you can only recognize it if you can actually see it and feel it and hear it. So in those moments, what is it that’s driving you those times where you are not diplomatic and questioning and trying to find that middle ground, but you go to, “I’m just going to call you out,” basically, what is it that is driving that?
VALENTINO: I think it’s anger. The reason why I say that is because a lot of times, leaders, they all know what the problem is, and I’ve had these conversations with my leadership and my leadership’s leadership outside of the conversation, and I’m sitting in the conversation and I’m looking at them and they’re saying, “Well,” and I think the fact that they’re remaining silent when my expectation is, “You’re a leader. You have the opportunity to move the needle here. Why not say something?” I think my attention then focuses on, “Why are you in the position you’re in if you’re not able to affect change in a positive way?” I think that’s where the amygdala hijack comes in, and I think I lose sight of the vision.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you just said it really beautifully. You have an expectation that’s being unmet, and when that expectation is being unmet, it makes you angry, right? You’re like, “Come on, what’s going on?” and then you go into-
VALENTINO: Overdrive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Overdrive. Exactly. So it sounds a little similar to something you shared about your background in terms of how you grew up and what was expected of you.
VALENTINO: Absolutely. I think it’s not a therapy session, but I do think it does have an impact. The expectations that were set when I was much younger by parents, my community was you hit things on the head, don’t dance around the issue. I think in that situation, my community leaders, my elders, so to speak, my parents, if there was an issue, we would bring everyone to the table. We would bring the village, so to speak, to the table. The way the leaders in my community, and I’ve been privileged and fortunate to work with leaders outside of my industry, and I’ve seen them at their best, the caliber and the pedigree of leaders that I’ve worked with, they challenge the issue, they put the issue on the table, and I think here what I’m seeing is that lack of assertiveness, that lack of, “Let’s challenge each other.” I think to your point, instead of reacting, respond in a way that’s productive because it’s ironic that the very thing that you’re trying to address, you’re compounding it by reacting in a way that’s counterproductive.
MURIEL WILKINS: The thing that you’re reacting to is your expectation. You’re reacting to your expectation of the way that they should be rather than realizing, “This is where they are. Therefore, what do I need to do? How do I need to be do to communicate based on where they are?” which is however it is that they’re communicating? I also think that I wasn’t necessarily going back to, as you said, this is not a therapy session, I wasn’t going back to how you were raised. I was going back to what your expectation was that you shared around when you do something. I think the way you said is when you do something, you do it right or you don’t do it at all.
VALENTINO: Exactly, and I think that’s the rob is if you’re doing it, why waste your time? Why make it half-baked? Because we’re talking about shareholders’ funds, it’s given to us. It’s a trust that our shareholders have a certain expectations of us. Why not perform, behave, lead in a way that if your shareholders see you, they would be proud of you. I think that’s tangential. I think what you’re saying though is how do I manage my emotions, how do I manage my situations, and how do I manage my reaction or my response to folks that I interact with, with colleagues that I interact with in such a way that I meet them where they are.
MURIEL WILKINS: You meet them where they are and not based on what you think or how you think things should be because even what you said, listen, in an ideal world, yes, everybody does exactly what they’re supposed to do, and they do it right, and they’re responsible and they’re not half-baked. They are … I get it, Valentino. You seem like a guy who is like 350% in on everything, right?
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you’re like, “If I’m that way, and I’ve seen other leaders be that way, every leader should be this way. Why should it not be?” So there’s something that’s happening where people are not leading according to Valentino’s rules, and as much as those rules are great, I would love to live in a world where everybody lived by those rules too. That’s not the reality of things. So you’re having a little bit of a mini tantrum in these meetings. It’s just the adult version. You boldly call them out.
VALENTINO: Mature tantrums. I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mature tantrums.
VALENTINO: I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I only bring this up because, yes, we could talk about communication skills and we could talk about the diplomatic way of doing it and the delivery, which we will, but if you don’t go back and kick the tire on what is the assumption and the expectation that is then leading you to react in this way, it’s all for not. You’ll end up right back here, and by here I mean here and what you experienced with your senior leaders today even, and maybe even here coaching with me because you’ll be like, “Dang it, Muriel. I did what you said to do and it still brought me back here.” So we’ve got to start with your expectation or not even your expectation, your assumption around how leaders should be. I know it sounds cliche, but there is no should. There just is. So the leaders you’re dealing with right now are what?
VALENTINO: Are not at a level where I expect leaders to be in their position.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. “They’re not at a level at which I expect them to be,” there’s a judgment there because who made up the definition of what the level is? It’s relative to what you think. It’s subjective. So I would like to hear a fact, meaning, the leaders I work with today did not communicate X, Y, Z or did communicate X, Y, Z.
VALENTINO: That’s a tough one. I get where you’re going and I think it’s going to be a transition, but I think if we were to go through the exercise, I would say the leaders that I work with today without judgment did not communicate in a way that was received. This is a tough one.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s tough about it?
VALENTINO: You talked about two things, the assumptions and the expectations, and the fact that I am struggling to put together one sentence. It says a lot. I have to unpack that because I think what you’ve said is I’ve created a world where I think I have a certain set of standards, which, by the way, are subjective, and leaders should behave this way. I expect them to behave this way. They are given a title, and this is what I assume of them. So I think I have to do a lot of unlearning and introspection because that’s why I’m here today. It’s not the communication. The communication is the output of everything else that comes before what’s being said or what you say.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, Valentino, here’s the thing. If you want to communicate effectively, you have to be able to see the situation effectively. I’m not dismissing your expectations. Like I said, I would love to live in that world. Not dismissing them. I’m just saying that it is tinting the way that you then see those leaders that is then creating these emotions of anger, which then is leading to the communication delivery issue that you have. So what we’re trying to do is neutralize it a little bit so that you can see the situation clearly and then determine, “Okay. Based on seeing the situation clearly without filter, then how do I or what do I say relative to the outcome?” So if I give you an example, I think I’ve used this example a lot, but the version of what I’m asking you is like if I ask you, “What’s the weather today?” and you say, “Oh, my gosh, the weather is amazing.” That tells me nothing about the weather except how you feel about it. It doesn’t tell me if it’s sunny, hot, cold or gray or rainy or snowing or hailing outside because your perception of what’s amazing weather might be very different than what my perception of amazing weather is. The data-driven response would be, “Oh, what’s the weather? It’s 35 degrees outside, and I’m looking, there’s water falling from the sky. It’s raining.” That’s the no judgment response. It’s what’s happening. Let’s see the situation clearly. So when I asked you what’s the situation with your leaders, what’s happening, you’re giving me the, “It’s amazing,” or, “It’s not amazing,” weather report rather than the, “Here’s the temperature,” and it’s either sunny or raining or hailing or snowing or whatever, something that is actually evidence-based.
VALENTINO: I get it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You get it.
VALENTINO: I think you’re absolutely right. It’s being able to label it with any color or baggage, so to speak. So it’s not what happened when the leaders communicate, and I’m still struggling. I get what you’re saying. It’s putting it in practice. When the leader communicated with the team, the team didn’t fully understand the message.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let’s leave it at that. This team did not fully understand the message, and how did you know? The team did not fully understand the message?
VALENTINO: It’s evidenced by the fact that there were a number of water cooler conversations. There were followup meetings.
MURIEL WILKINS: Side conversations.
VALENTINO: Questions of clarification after the meeting. There were several sessions that took place to clarify the original message.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, we’re not labeling it. I love the fact that you used the word labeling rather than the word I use, which is without judgment. I think labeling is actually a simpler way of thinking about it. Without labeling it, your assessment is something was communicated by the senior leaders. It was not understood by the receivers of that message. My interpretation of that it was not understood is based on the fact that there were a series of followup conversations that needed to happen, side conversations.
VALENTINO: 100%.
MURIEL WILKINS: 100%. What do you think the impact would be if you were to state that?
VALENTINO: It would’ve been very different.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
VALENTINO: The fact that my interpretation of what happened maybe followed by, and it could have been different, and it’s not the ideal way of communicating it, but I think it took some of the edge off because even though it was a bit subjective, I clearly stated that it was my perception of what happened, and here’s the evidence that I bring forth to support my assumption or to support my thesis.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. So you’re owning your interpretation rather than demanding that others see it the way that you did it.
VALENTINO: Yes or projecting it.
MURIEL WILKINS: … or projecting it. That’s the fancy word, but yes, or projecting it.
VALENTINO: Yes. Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. So that’s part one. What it does then is allow you, when you’re able to say, “It’s my interpretation, my perception, I own it,” what does it then allow you to do in the next step of your communication?
VALENTINO: I think what that does is it creates an environment in which we can go back and forth. It does not come across as being condescending, as being subjective, as being pushy. It comes more across of, “Let’s explore this. Let’s understand …” and I think it creates a more collaborative environment because then I would be more receptive if I was on the receiving end of what I just said rather than, “Well …” and even though I didn’t say this, it would come across as, “Well, you guys don’t know what you’re doing. You’re inept and you should probably think about updating your resume.”
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re going straight to that.
VALENTINO: So I think it’s a different tone. The modality of the delivery is very different. It’s very receptive.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what you said around, it allows for opening. If you own that, it’s your interpretation, you then have a chance to check it out. So again, going back to the weather, if I say, “Hey, it’s sunny outside. That’s amazing. It’s amazing. Isn’t it amazing?” and you go, “No, that’s not amazing. I don’t like hot weather.” “Oh, okay,” versus me saying, “Hey, it’s sunny outside. It’s amazing. It really is amazing. You should go put some shorts and a tank top on,” and you’re like, “What? What did she tell …” “No, no, really, let me convince you that that’s what you should do,” and if you’re like, “I don’t understand,” and then I’m like, “Oh, my God, what’s wrong with this person that they don’t want to wear flip flops and shorts and tank tops and it’s sunny outside?”
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Very close ended if I do it the latter way, okay? You’re right, then you jump to, “What’s wrong with this person that they’re not getting and making the same assessment that I’m making?”
VALENTINO: I laugh, but it’s very profound because the weather example, a farmer may say, like you said, a farmer, “It’s raining. Great. My crops are going to blossom.” Well, I may not like the rain because I have a parade today. So now the farmer’s projecting, and then it creates a lot more animosity, for lack of a better word. It creates a negative environment, which, again, the irony of it all is the exact thing you’re trying to do, you’re undoing or creating, you’re exacerbating the problem by projecting, by me looking at the world through my tinted lens of, “This is how it should be. These are my assumptions, and I’m therefore projecting it on you. What’s wrong with you? Why don’t you understand it? Are you okay? Why don’t you get it?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So this is key because if you’re trying to get somebody to a certain destination, basically what you’re trying to do is influence rather than get them to comply, right, Valentino? You do have to, again, a little cliche, but you have to take your glasses off and put theirs on and see the world through their eyes so that you can understand where they’re starting from and frame the message in a way that they’re going to best understand it. Right now, you’re framing the message in a way that you understand it and you’re sending the message in a tone that you understand it, meaning when the tone that’s used with you is when you don’t do something, you better get it right. That works for you. That’s the tone that works for you or that’s the tone that has worked for you to get you to the place where you are today. That tone doesn’t necessarily work for everybody else.
VALENTINO: Why not? No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why not?
VALENTINO: I’ve never looked at it that way, but I think it’s a very profound way of looking at it because it then changes the delivery. It then changes the interaction, it then changes the expectation. It then allows me to challenge those assumptions and expectations.
MURIEL WILKINS: This session is bringing up an important facet of coaching, especially when it’s not an ongoing relationship. Part of the situation that Valentino outlined around his communication style is the sense that he gets that what he’s saying doesn’t land well with others. Not only does nothing change when he communicates, but people don’t seem to react well. This can be a bit tricky as a coach because I’m not able to talk to others and see how they experience Valentino or get a better sense of their side of the story, but there are a lot of things that we can do. So taking Valentino through why he communicates the way he does and what other options he has is really key. Now, it’s time to think about how some of this reframing might actually play out in practice. Let’s dive back in as we work through some scenarios. So let’s do a little bit of practice around this. If you were to put yourself in the shoes of these very leaders who you felt are not doing right by everybody, put yourself in their shoes, how do you feel you need to convey your message in a way that’s going to best land with them?
VALENTINO: I think the first thing I would do is take a step back, get a panoramic view of the situation, challenge the assumptions I have, look at my expectations, and then ask questions that are non-judgmental. Again, going back to the, “Oh, my God, it’s amazing.” “No, it’s raining and it’s 35 degrees outside,” I think that’s the approach I would now embrace, and using that mindset, I think the exchange, the back and forth will take on a different tone because my world, I’ve had the privilege or pleasure or whatever it is of living with myself for the last however many years. So my world is quite different from theirs, and it would allow me to bring grace, patience, understanding the situation before popping off at the mouth, so to speak. Perhaps in some cases, they may have challenges that they probably weren’t prepared. I think it allows me to not be so dogmatic about what I know is right and I know they should be doing, and it would add a bit of, I would say, levity, sobriety in terms of how I communicate, what my expectations are. It would really give me pause to think about what’s the outcome, one, you’re trying to achieve? Check your assumptions at the door and engage.
MURIEL WILKINS: Beautiful. So here’s the thing. We started off this conversation, and when I asked you what type of feedback do you get, the feedback you get is, “Look, Valentino, your message, the point you’re making is on point. It’s right. It’s the way that you’re delivering it.” So in no way do we want to dismiss this asset that you have around being able to laser in on what a solution might be or what an answer might be. It’s not all of a sudden like, “Oh, I don’t know.” It’s the way that you convey that. I also asked you what was your intention, and then we talked a little bit about impact and what you just said here around, “If I want to do it with compassion and with grace,” and you used other words. So part of what I think would be helpful is if you think about when you convey a message, when you’re about to deliver something to these senior leaders, how is it that you want them to feel after you’ve conveyed the message? How do you want them to feel about themselves, about the situation, and about you? So when I asked that, what are some of the words that come up for you? How do you want them to feel about you?
VALENTINO: In terms of the situation, I want them to feel empowered. I want them to feel encouraged. I want them to feel good about themselves because if I’m stomping and stepping and tearing them down, the energy that they’re using to either fight that or to wrestle with that could have been diverted to actually solving the problem. So I think how would I want them to feel about me, that I’m someone they can work with, that I’m someone who’s collaborative, that I’m someone who understands the vision and who’s willing to work with them, not against them to achieve the mission so we can all be successful, our shareholders can be successful, our team members can be successful, you can be successful as my leader, and I can be successful as your subordinate.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it sounds like you want them to feel like you are on the same side of the table as they are in solving whatever issues you’re bringing up rather than being across the table pointing the finger.
VALENTINO: Absolutely. I think it would come across with less hubris or less, “I know what’s right, you don’t. Hahaha,” or it would come across more mature. I think you mentioned the mature tantrum I think becomes a constructive conversation, “Here’s the path. How do we go down that path and how do we work together to achieve our objectives?” not necessarily, “Well, you should be and why aren’t you?” It’s counterproductive. It does not add to the outcome. It’s distracting.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if I may, I’m going to suggest a practice for you post our meeting, which is prior to every conversation that you go in with these specific leaders that you visualize starting being and staying on the same side of the table, okay? Then ask yourself, “If I’m going to stay on the same side of the table, what tone do I need to use and what communication strategies do I need to use when I’m trying to get my message across?” So notice I didn’t say don’t say anything. It’s tone and strategy.
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: “If I want them to feel, and in fact, I am on the same side, on the same team, same side of the table as they’re,” and then what’s going to happen is you’re going to be in these meetings, and every now and then you’re going to realize, “Oh, my gosh, how did I get to the other side of the table? I didn’t mean to do that.” That’s okay. That’s actually where the learning will happen is in noticing when you default and then you just want to step back to the other side, and how do you do that? So what are going to be your tools to course correct? Your tone and your communication strategy, and you already said what they were. You said, “Communication strategy, I need to probably start with more questions in a way that’s open-ended. I need to own what my interpretation is rather than demand that they see it the same way that I do. My tone doesn’t need to have any type of emotive around it. It’s neutral.” So when I say all that, what do you think would get in the way of you being able to practice that?
VALENTINO: My ego. The question I think has now been shifted from how do I communicate the message in a way that folks can understand to how do I manage my internal, my expectations, and my assumptions internally, being mindful of the tone, being mindful of the strategy, and obviously above all the outcome, how do I want to leave these leaders or how do I want to leave this transaction, this communication, this conversation? Starting with those I think will be key.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, I think you hit the nail on the head there. Transfer the energy that you’re expending towards others and transfer it back to you to manage yourself.
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you can manage yourself, you have a better chance of then being able to manage the communication that comes out of you and then hopefully influence others because you’re not going to be able to control them. All you’re doing is trying to influence. So bring it back a couple of steps. So exactly what you just said, revert the energy to managing yourself.
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: So my sense is that you get it, right? You get what you need to do. Now, it’s a matter of doing it, and it takes practice.
VALENTINO: It’s practice. The theory is great. I think the rubber meets the road when you’re faced with the situation, and oftentimes we don’t always measure up to our highest standards when we’re in the heat of the moment, and I think it’s going to be an exercise that will not come easily because the default is to be emotional, to be reactive, and to say, “Why can’t you see it this way?” and then start projecting. I think it’s going to take some patience and some diligence and discipline to continue on the journey. I don’t think I’ll ever get there, but I think with practice over time, it will become better. I’ll be more self-aware. I’ll control the amygdala a bit more. It’s a very useful way of approaching conversations, not just with leaders, but I think I participated in a lot of sports. Sometimes taking that step back, meeting people where they are … A couple months ago, I was running with my wife and I love to run, and she’s not where I am. I think the lack of patience there was, now looking back at it, made me realize that, yes, sometimes my expectations and the way I project those expectations and assumptions can sometimes have unintended consequences. So this is extremely helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, you’re not going to be able to get your wife to run any faster if you’re yelling at her 10 miles down the road because, first of all, she can’t hear you. As a fellow runner, let me tell you that, and running way behind her isn’t going to do it either. That’s the version of not saying anything. How do you coach somebody or how do you support somebody to run a little faster up the hill through the muck? How do you do it?
VALENTINO: You do it by being side by side, encouraging, responding, motivating.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
VALENTINO: I think going way ahead or staying far behind, both are counterproductive. It’s you meet them where they are, literally. In this analogy, I think we meet and we stay with each other, and again, it takes a great deal of patience, a great deal of self-awareness to be able to say, “Yes, let’s take this path together. Whether we’re going up the hill, going around through or over a barrier or we’re on the straits, we are together. We’re one team.”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. Anyone who takes running seriously as it sounds like you do, I certainly do, one of the first things you do when you set out on a run is you set your intention, “What is this run about? Is it a fun run? Is it a training run? Who am I running with? How do I want to be with that? Am I going to stick by their side? If I know I want a hard training run and I already know the person is slow, should I even be going out with them?” You set your intention and you set your intention based on how you want the run to go and how you want to feel after the run.
VALENTINO: Begin with the end in mind. Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Begin with the end in mind. So you have that at your disposal to use as well when you go into these meetings, and practice with your wife. I think that’s amazing. All right. Beautiful. So I think we can wrap it up. I’d love to hear in a few words, you can use adjectives, how did you feel at the beginning of our coaching conversation and how are you feeling now?
VALENTINO: I think in the beginning I had a lot of questions, I had a lot of doubts. I was less sure of what the outcome is. I think at the end, I have the tools that are at my disposal that I can leverage, whether it’s in personal situations or professional settings to help my peers grow, to help myself grow and to work toward an outcome that’s mutually beneficial for not only myself, but for others. I think I feel I’ve grown tremendously from the beginning of the conversation to the end of the conversation because I now have the tools that will enable me to be successful.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what happens in a coaching session like this is that the awareness increases.
VALENTINO: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: The awareness increases. The growth will happen through the practice. So you’ve got to go forth and practice now. That’s the only way that you’ll see if what we discussed, if the insights that you had today actually stick. So do that and then come back and let me know how it went.
VALENTINO: Absolutely. Thank you so much, Muriel. This has been very helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Communicating clearly and effectively while also building trust and influence is a key skill of any great leader. Valentino came to this session with the goal of eventually getting to the C-suite in his career, but also knowing that there are some communication issues that he’d like to work on, especially when it comes to managing up. We work through what a lot of his assumptions and expectations are around what leaders should be. By approaching his interactions more objectively, it can help reframe his reaction to the situation and to those around him because a key skill of leadership isn’t always about doing it your way. It’s about making sure how you communicate really lands with your stakeholders. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time-
SPEAKER 3: I’m finding it a really tough decision because possibly for the first time in my life, I might have a bit of imposter syndrome. I usually feel very confident about what I can and can’t do. If I say I can’t do something, I probably can’t. I’m usually very confident about those decisions for myself, and I’m not confident about this one. I don’t know what I think. I don’t know how I want to move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant, Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com and, of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Stay Motivated After Surviving Layoffs?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Melissa to protect her confidentiality. She has a background in leading strategic programs and joined a large tech company a few years ago, and then quickly shifted roles within that organization.
MELISSA: I was very, very fortunate to find a role that not only fit my skillset, but fit where I was in my life at that moment and where I wanted to be from a passion perspective and a personal mission perspective. So, it gave me the opportunity to unify my passion and my mission.
MURIEL WILKINS: Melissa now uses her skillset to build community within her organization, and she feels a strong connection to her purpose in this role.
MELISSA: I really, really wanted to share my knowledge with others, learn from others, and create a community that supported each other from a professional perspective. Even if their starts were not what they imagined, even if they had been through multiple setbacks in their lives, I wanted us to all be successful and thrive together and be successful in what we do.
MURIEL WILKINS: But she, like many others right now, is feeling a little uneasy because of circumstances beyond her control. As we meet for our coaching session, we’re in the midst of an economic downturn and many companies are drastically downsizing. Melissa’s company also recently announced some pretty massive layoffs and it’s weighing on her.
MELISSA: I work for a company where we thought we will not be impacted, and then come to find out, we were not in a place where we could assume that that was not the case. And unfortunately, a short while ago, a lot of people were impacted, and we are now in a place where we are adjusting to that, and I don’t know how to handle it because it’s something that I did not expect to happen to us. So, that feeling of safety has been taken away. This is the first time in my professional career where I’m seeing something like this happen and also in the way it happened. So, I’m really dealing with those personal feelings and emotions. My work has never been more aligned to my passion than it is now, and I think that’s why I’m currently in a place where I’m like, “I don’t want to lose this.” I’m really holding onto it because I’m like, “This is the best I’ve ever felt in my career, and I want to maintain this feeling of I’m doing what I should be doing in this phase of my life.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Melissa is in a tough place where she’s truly found a role that aligns with her personal purpose. She’s doing the work she wants to do in an organization where she feels she can make an impact, but all of this has come into question for her as she deals with the aftermath of surviving the layoffs at her company. Let’s dive in now as I ask her more about what she’s feeling as a result of these changes.
MELISSA: The biggest feeling for me is that no one is safe. I don’t believe in job security anymore. I feel like it does not exist in the way I thought it existed. So, my definition of job security was the fact that the contract that I went into with my employer will be honored when the time comes for either them to break away from the contract or for me to break away from the contract, and I never assumed that it could be over overnight. So, for me, that sense of lack of security has been the biggest one. And also hearing from the stories and experiences that people have had, hearing people who were strong performers, people who’ve put their whole lives into this company who’ve worked for multiple years, being let go also made me question if my working hard and doing the work that I’m doing, the quality that I’m doing it actually gives me any sense of security when a time this comes. It’s like, “What am I working towards? Am I working towards something because I want to be doing it, or am I working towards something because I know that my company will honor this when the time comes for difficult decisions to be made?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what are you working towards?
MELISSA: I’m working towards ensuring that…
MURIEL WILKINS: Take your time. It’s okay, Melissa. What’s going on for you right now?
MELISSA: It’s really the feeling of, you hear the pain and the experiences that people are having and going through it, but wanting to help at the same time and not even knowing if… It just feels like a lot is out of our control. Can we actually do anything to improve it? Can we actually do anything to make it better? We keep pushing forward and we’re motivating ourselves to do things, but is it actually going to change? Is it going to be better? Are we going to help people? Are we going to come out of this better? Are we going to come out of this stronger? Or are we going to just lose ourselves?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, first of all, I want to acknowledge that what you and it sounds like a lot of your colleagues have experienced is no small thing. It sounds like it was at scale, which is a different feeling. If you think about it, it’s like there’s a difference when you’re driving down the highway and you see a car accident where it’s one car that bumped into another one, crashed into another one. Even if it’s not fatal in any way, but there’s a car accident between two cars and you’re like, Oh, it’s an accident. There’s a difference between that versus you drive down the highway and you see oh my gosh, it’s 30 cars.
MELISSA: Yeah, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Still not fatal, but it’s 30. So, it becomes the scale or the enormity of it. So, I want to acknowledge that. I want to acknowledge that as you said, this is the first time you’ve ever gone through anything like this. I want to acknowledge that you didn’t expect it. So, there’s this sense of I thought I knew what I was dealing with and come to find out I don’t, I did not, through no fault of your own. It’s not your fault that you didn’t know. So, you’re dealing with the uncertainty. And what has driven you in terms of the part of your career that really fulfills your personal mission, your personal vision is to help. And now you’re wondering, Is my personal drive, my personal mission, is it even relevant in this environment? That’s a lot. I just want to pause for a sec. That’s a lot. And so, if you’re feeling, which as we’re talking to each other and I’m experiencing you, I want to just pause and acknowledge it’s a lot. So, for it to feel like a lot is actually aligned with the situation.
MELISSA: Yeah. I think for me… And I will get to the question that you originally asked. For me, one of the things that drives me is my sense of responsibility, my sense of responsibility to my community. I grew up in a culture that is very community focused, where we do good not only for ourselves, but the community and the people around us, the village around us. And I brought that same thinking to my workplace where I want to make sure my team is good. I want to make sure the clients and customers that I serve with, the work that I do and the services that I provide are good. I want to make sure that the communities that we support are good. It’s that sense of responsibility for making sure that everyone around us is taken care of, or at least we’ve done what we can. I grew up in a culture where you ask someone, “Have you eaten?” So, it’s like the basic needs of the individuals I met. So, being able to have that conversation and being able to cater to other people’s needs has always been something that I grew up with and something that I’ve carried with me. So, going through a situation like this, I carry my own personal feelings and my personal challenges, but also a strong responsibility for the community, and I don’t know where to stop and where to start because I’m also acknowledging that there’s so much that is out of my control. So I’m like, Are there small things that I can do to take care of my community while there’s chaos around? Are there things that I can do for my community right now that will potentially serve individuals but maybe not serve the company as a whole? And that is something that I’m trying to get clarity on. How can I go through this with my own feelings, but also serve the community and the people out there that I care so much about? I care about the company and the company pays me, but I care more about the people that are going through this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And there was a time where the people were the company. There was a time where the people were the company, and now there’s a dissonance where there’s the people and then there’s the company, and it seems like there’s some disconnect there for you.
MELISSA: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now, whether that’s the case or not, I’m not here to judge one way or the other. It’s just more I’m reflecting back the way that you’re seeing it, which is not your usual based on what you’ve experienced so far. So, Melissa, I think there’s a couple of things going on, and I’d like to figure out which route we’re going to take. So I think on the one hand, there are a lot of assumptions and beliefs and expectations that you’ve had of how a company behaves, how it treats its employees, what job security means. There were a lot of assumptions that I think now you’ve come to face with saying, “Oh my goodness, there’s this other world that I either didn’t believe exist or chose not to believe exists that I’ve now found myself in.” I’m chuckling a little bit, but I don’t want to belittle it. It is literally breaking, throwing a stone at what you believed the world should be like in the working place. So, it’s questioning your beliefs. I think when that happens, there’s an opportunity to explore, How attached am I to the way I think things should happen versus, This is the way I desire things to happen. And I understand that sometimes things don’t happen the way that I desire. And so then what? So, I think that’s one jumping off point. The first question is, what happens when what I think should happen doesn’t happen? And then the second is, what happens when I have a full affront that there is a lot more than I thought that’s out of my control? And what do I do then? So, I think those are the two things. One is your expectations, your beliefs, which are profound for you, were not met. And then secondly, there’s a lot that’s out of your control. And then I think third is, as you said, you’re somebody who you have this responsibility to community to make sure everyone’s needs are met. And so there’s a situation here now where you feel like people’s needs were not met, the contract was broken. I want to alleviate that and I have no idea how to. So, then becomes like, Well, what is your responsibility? So, which direction would you like to go in? What would be most helpful to you?
MELISSA: It will be most helpful to me to figure out how to adjust when things happen that are out of my control because I’m currently in that place where yeah, my beliefs were broken, but I need to accept it. I’m working for this company, don’t plan to leave anytime soon. So, I need to accept that it’s been done, and how do we move on? So, I would really benefit from learning more about how do I handle the lack of control that I’m feeling, and how do I adjust myself to be able to function and do great work in this situation?
MURIEL WILKINS: First of all, I love that you made the distinction between, you pivoted a little bit where you started off with, How do I adjust when things are out of my control? And then you said, How do I handle when things are out of my control? And then you went back to, How do I adjust when things are out of my control? There’s a difference between handling something and adjusting to something. Handling something is literally, you’re just trying to hold the handle. You’re trying to hold on. Adjust is, Okay, I accept that things have changed. Doesn’t mean that I’m passive, doesn’t mean that I’m happy about it, but I accept that things are not the way they are. What do I need to do to be able to move with the reality of the way things are? So, if we were to fast-forward 12 months from now and we were having a conversation, you and I, I checked in on you as I do with many of my clients, and I’d say, “What’s going on?” And you were like, Oh my gosh, I feel like I have found myself again fully adjusted, what would that look like to you?
MELISSA: For me, it would look like I personally have that sense of we did what we should have done in times like these. So yes, we adjusted, or personally starting with me, I adjusted to the current state and we were successful. That will be the story that I would like to tell in 12 months. And what does success mean in this context? I personally was not burnt out, is my number one through the process. I don’t want to lose myself and lose my health and be impacted. So, that’s number one. Number two is success for me personally looks like I have a sense of fulfillment of the work that we did. So, how we serve the community in the aspect of the work that we own. And a third thing is I would like to still feel like we drove positive change. So, out of the chaos, out of people feeling let down and dealing with my own personal feeling of disappointment, I still want us to feel and know that we led culture change and something became better through the year. If we spoke in 12 months and this happened, I will be very happy that we accomplished that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Wonderful. I want you to be happy. That’s what we’re going to aim for. Happy Melissa. Melissa is facing something a lot of people go through at some point in their career, not being laid off herself, but dealing with the aftermath of being a leader who stays on at the company after an event like that. It’s complicated by the fact that she’s also doing work she really believes in and doesn’t want to lose momentum or motivation within herself or lose buy-in from those around her. And while what she’s facing is the fallout from the layoffs, the underlying issue is really how she deals with things beyond her control. So, the next step was to figure out how she defines success in this new normal before deciding on the roadmap to get there. What I’ve heard from her so far is a desire for her work to continue to be relevant, to create insights and to drive change at the organization. What is less clear and might be hard for her to know is the order of magnitude, how much she can drive these things given the changing circumstances. So, I reframe the question for her to be less around what she thinks she should do and more about what she believes she could do to see how that might change her perspective on the situation.
MELISSA: I think when I hear the word could, it takes into consideration what is in our control, and the fact that there will be things that we cannot do. “Could” gives me more grace. When I think of what can I do versus what should I do, “should” puts a lot of responsibility again and the load and the burden. And “could” adds some grace because it’s like, there might be something we can’t do because of an external factor, X, Y, Z. I struggle with that though because I don’t do well with thinking that there will be things that we cannot do as a planning strategy, but I know that we do build plans that change and adapt and we are successful in the end if we adapt successfully. I think for me, it’s around framing how do we plan for could when I’m used to planning for should?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what would it look like for you to plan for both?
MELISSA: Ooh. That’s very interesting. So, let me play this in concrete ways for us. So, let’s say now, we’re planning to work on six programs and initiatives, and we think that that’s what we should do. So, the six programs are on our should list. We’ve gotten the budget allocation, the resources, and we’re planning for that. And then a could plan would allow for if we dropped one of the six and decided to do something else because that was what was in our realm of influence and what was in our control, that will also be okay, or if we dropped something totally and we will need to accept that that’s okay because our could plan does not expect us to achieve all six or not be successful. So, it doesn’t say we’re not successful if we don’t accomplish all six. So, I could plan for six, but be okay with revisiting that plan and being more adaptable and flexible to allow us have those conversations on is there something else that is influencing this plan and is there something else that will make this plan not be successful?
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I think you’re giving yourself range and I think you’re accounting through the two scenarios. If you want to think about them as guardrails, the “could” is, Here’s what we know with certainty as of today, as of today, as of this minute. Because really, are we really certain about anything? I think that’s the lesson here and being comfortable with that. But as of this minute, here’s what we think we can do with certainty and should do with certainty, and here’s what we think we could do and should do if all these other factors became certain, but we don’t know. But if this became certain and that if the budget became certain, if we knew we could get this amount, if we knew this, this, and that, then we think we could do this. That’s what we’d like to aim for. And we understand it may take us some time before that certainty comes to light, if ever. And so we also have different scenarios to adjust to. So, in practical terms, Melissa, this is scenario planning. Scenario planning is very different than, This is the way, and by God, I’m going to attach myself to that boat and I’m not letting go. That’s how the Titanic happened. Scenario planning is, We think this is what can happen, but we take into account that uncertainty is actually certain. There is certain to be uncertainty. So, can you find the certainty in the uncertainty?
MELISSA: It’s really interesting that you say that because in my mind, I’ve gone to the place where I’m like, “There was this chaotic event. So, we allowed that to happen. But from now on, everything is going to be sure and everything’s going to be certain.” And now, I don’t know that, but I feel like my brain has gone to that place where I’m like, “Okay, okay. Now, everything’s going to be good for the rest of the year.” And with that mindset, I’m setting myself up for this spin again if something happens that we were not planning. Hopefully, there will not be any other mass layoffs, but there might be other changes or reorgs. I mean, reorganizations of different job units, reorganizations of teams, people will be moved to other teams. How can I make sure that I’m planning with potential change in mind?
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. I mean, it’s interesting to me because you said, “I’m automatically going to like, ‘Okay, this chaos happened. It can’t happen again. Everything’s going to be good from now on’.” I’m like, okay, so what does that do for you?
MELISSA: Makes me feel safe for now. It makes me feel safe for now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, it makes you feel safe. I’m not making fun of you. I mean, do what you got to do, but that might work for a little bit.
MELISSA: Yeah. And given the recent events, it’s not a strategy. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I’m being a little facetious here. And in reality, I think this is part of you redefining what makes you feel safe, right, Melissa? The things that you thought made you safe went out the window. This is an opportunity for you to sit and ask yourself like, “Well, truly what does make me feel safe?” And so I’m asking.
MELISSA: What makes me feel safe is financial stability, is one of the biggest things. And with a company laying off people, my job is threatened. So, that’s the biggest thing for me. Not being able to care for others financially is a huge, huge burden. One of the elements and first thoughts that came to mind when I started seeing the layoffs happen, I thought of the fact that if I lose my job, it will not only impact me and my current household, but it will impact other family members that I care of in a negative way. But again, I know that I’ve been working towards financial stability for years and it will not impact us immediately. So it’s like something… It’s that fear that I go to, but it’s actually not real. It’s not real in the day to day. I know. As I’m saying it, I’m like, Okay, come on, Melissa – i’s not going to impact you in six months, in a year, but you’re using that as fear that you want to hold onto for now. So, maybe I don’t have any real fears.
MURIEL WILKINS: She says, “Maybe I don’t have any real fears.” We all have real fears, Melissa. Well, real? I don’t know. We all have fears. Whether they’re real or not, I don’t know. I mean, here’s the thing. I think you’re doing the should-could thing personally. You have this sense of financial responsibility and you say, “I should be responsible, financially responsible for supporting them,” and you haven’t played out, “What happens if I can’t do it at the level that I’m doing it now or at the level that I would like to?” Which goes back to just like we played it out for what happens internally at a company. Well, then if that happens, what could you do? You can only do what you can do. That doesn’t mean that it takes away your value of supporting the community. And I’m not downplaying this. This is a very real situation. I get it. We want to be financially stable, okay? But the question becomes, if you can’t provide for yourself in the way that you do now, then what do you do?
MELISSA: Yeah. Probably move out of the area that I currently live in that is extremely expensive. But yes, I hear you on the… Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You may not like it, but you do. So, I’m going to offer a different definition of safety for you, that the safety doesn’t necessarily lie in everything falling in place in the way that we would like it to. The safety lies in the belief that no matter how things fall in place, even if it’s in ways that we don’t like it, or even if it’s ways that we don’t expect, we’ll be able to deal with it.
MELISSA: When you say it, it seems like I should have thought about it. It’s what I should be thinking.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s a lot of “shoulds,” Melissa.
MELISSA: Yes, that’s a lot of “shoulds.” Okay, I could have been thinking about this.
MURIEL WILKINS: You could have, but you didn’t. But then here you are, and now you are.
MELISSA: Now I’m thinking about it this way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now you can. Now you can. Now you can. You couldn’t before. Why? Because maybe it was something that never came on the horizon. There’s no way you should do something if it’s never come on your horizon, but now you can. So, now it’s a choice. Can I think about it this way or not?
MELISSA: Yeah. I really like that framing. I like the way you framed that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you used that sense of, I can think about safety even in my organization from the standpoint of no matter what happens, which is basically uncertainty. In spite of the uncertainty, I/we will be able to deal with it, how does that help you adjust to when things are out of your control? Which was the original question that you asked.
MELISSA: I think first of all, it helps me name and be more comfortable with the fact that there are a lot of things that are out of our control. I know it intellectually. My head, my brain tells me that there are a lot of things that are out of our control, but my heart needs to believe that it’s okay that there are things that are out of our control. I think for me, that’s the first thing that will change and needs to change for me as I navigate adjusting to this new normal and the new normal that will come after the next change. Because as we said, we know that there is a lot of this uncertainty and change will come. I think for me, because I’m a planner, the second thing that comes to mind is I will need to figure out how to plan for times like this. And you shared the useful way of thinking about this as scenario planning, thinking about this as creating a range of different options. And that helps me as a planner to be like, Okay, you’re planning for something, but you’re not planning for certainty, which a lot of our plans are based on. You’re planning for uncertainty. And I need to go buy books and read more about this because I think there’s a lot of skill that can be developed here. But first of all, it starts with my head and my heart, and actually my gut telling me, “Be more comfortable with the concept of the “could,” accepting that there’s a lot that is out of our control, and accepting that uncertainty is part of our business now.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think uncertainty is part of your business, not just now, but it has been. It’s just that the uncertainty in the past is falling in line with what you wanted so it didn’t feel uncertain. I mean, this is the leadership skill of dealing with ambiguity if we want to put the fancy leadership-y terms on it. What does it mean? It means being comfortable with uncertainty. It doesn’t mean that you’ve got to throw your hands up in the air and panic and say, “Oh, well, I guess it means I can’t do anything.” No, it’s an and. I accept that there’s going to be some uncertainty and I’m going to operate in a way that we can still move forward. It’s the both, which can feel very contradictory, but they’re not contradictory. They play off of each other, but accepting both as fact. Is uncertainty a fact? Yes, it is. Yes, it is. We hate to face it. Believe me.
MELISSA: I was like, “Uncertainty’s a fact.” I can see those words written on the wall.
MURIEL WILKINS: But guess what? I mean, you work in tech, right?
MELISSA: Yeah. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Technology, complete innovation is birthed out of uncertainty.
MELISSA: Yep. That is true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Breaking down beliefs of what we think should happen, and then here comes some new technical innovation. I’m old enough to be able to say, my goodness, if you had told me 40 years ago, 50 years ago that I wouldn’t be talking on a landline phone, I would’ve been like, “What? That’s certain. I will be talking on a phone with a little spiral wire that’s connected to a wall for the rest of my days.” And then what happens? So, uncertainty is always around us. We just don’t see it as that as long as it fits with what we think should happen, okay? So I think what you’re saying around getting comfortable with it, accepting it, you already are comfortable with it. You just need to be comfortable with it in other aspects when it’s not aligned with what you want, okay?
MELISSA: And I think that’s the part I have to underline, it’s when it’s not aligned with what I want or what I thought about.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, what you thought about.
MELISSA: Yes. There’s planning for uncertainty where you’re like, Okay, this might happen. We might have people leave the organization and new people come in. We plan for that. So, it’s that element. And then it becomes something that I have accepted and something that I plan with and know, and I don’t necessarily like it, but it’s okay. But now, maybe I’m adding to my list of… Not maybe. Now, I need to add to my list of uncertain things that I accept. And I might not know them now or know the things that I need to add to my list, but as things happen, I need to be agile enough and self-aware that the tension I’m feeling is because they’re not on my accepted uncertainty list.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. I love that, you’re accepted uncertainties. And we’re talking here about, okay, plan for the uncertainties. You can also only do that to a certain extent. You’re not going to be able to do it to the zillionth degree and have some… I don’t want a year from now, you’re like, I have a spreadsheet that is a gazillion lines and I have planned out every single scenario. We don’t want that either, okay?
MELISSA: How’d you know that was the natural place I was going through?
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s to a certain point. And then, you hold it loosely. Why? Because something else can happen. If you hold onto the plan so tightly, you are not going to be able to adapt, adjust, as you said, be agile when circumstances change because you’re going to be holding onto the plan so tightly, even though the tide is pulling you in a different direction, you refuse to go because you’re holding onto the plan, okay? So, you make a plan and then you hold onto it loosely. What does that mean, to hold onto it loosely?
MELISSA: First of all, I want to appreciate the fact that you said hold onto the plan loosely and not let go. Let go is something that every time people say it, I feel pain in my stomach because I’m like…
MURIEL WILKINS: So, Melisa, are you telling me you don’t like the movie
Frozen
? “Let It Go”?
MELISSA: No, I don’t let it go. No, no, not a song I want to sing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, okay, okay, okay.
MELISSA: Not a song I believe in. I have a physical reaction to that because it’s not something that aligns with how I live my life, but I can get used to holding onto a plan loosely because in my life, I’ve learned through different situations and things that did not happen as I expected. And I guess what I did from that or learned from that is to seek security in every other way. And now, I have to go back and remember how we held onto plans loosely at that point and still held commitments where we could, again, thinking about the could, but also let go when things were out of our control because we could not do them at that time for different circumstances. So, I really value the holding on loosely.
MURIEL WILKINS: So far in this coaching with Melissa, we’ve really dug deep into what she can and can’t do, what she has control over. Now that we’ve addressed a bit of how to adapt her mindset to be more flexible, to hold things more loosely, we can think about how to really implement this and how she can impact her team. When I coach, it’s important that my client become aware of their own behavior first, but we don’t want to just stop at self-awareness. We also want to walk away with an action plan and specific steps they can take. Let’s jump back in as I ask Melissa about how she might put some of this into practice with her team.
MELISSA: I think the biggest thing is having a constant mental note to revisit our plans based on where we are in three months, in six months in shorter increments, to not only enable myself to ask what has been added or what is coming up for me on my list of accepted uncertainty, but also signal to my team that I’m not expecting them to burn through and do the “should” because I’m holding myself to that standard of should, but that we’re having an open dialogue and a conversation around the “could” given whatever climate we find ourselves in. So, I think for me, at work, adaptive planning is going to be very key this year, and it will be something that I will need to do for myself to get in the right mind space, but also in partnership for my team and with my team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Amazing. And with your team, you have to meet them where they are. And I think this word that you’ve brought up multiple times around safety, defining it within a place of, for lack of a better word, I hate using this word, but empowerment. What can you do that’s in your control that makes you feel safe at this moment? What can we do as a team in this moment, in this meeting that in spite of all the chaos going on around us makes us feel as safe as we can feel? A large part of when people start feeling unsafe in the workplace is when they start losing a feeling of agency. And so one of the roles you can play as a manager is restoring a sense of agency within the context that they’re in. I mean, that’s the issue. The context is not vibing with what you all want and desire. And for a long time, it did. It vibed. Now, it’s not.
MELISSA: I really like the naming of agency being something that the team is currently struggling with. If we think about, we’re holding onto a plan loosely, we do have agency in that model. It’s just that we might not know, clearly. We might not be able to define agency to the nth degree as we’ve had to or we’ve been able to in the past, but we do have some control of the work that we do. But I really like that, having that conversation, an ongoing conversation as a team as to what can we do? Where do we have that sense of agency or where are we lacking it at the moment? I think the conversation will happen more from the lack side, but they’re reminding ourselves of…
MURIEL WILKINS: What do we have, right?
MELISSA: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And again, with acknowledging what’s happened because in a sense, not even in a sense. I mean, what you all are going through and what you are going through, at least from what I’m experiencing with you, you’re grieving what was. It is a grieving process. And it’s a grieving of the way the company was, it’s a grieving of the way you thought things would be. And so you have to allow yourself to also go through that process. So as a manager, it’s also being able to hold that space for your people, but helping lead them through it as well. But you can’t do that unless you go through it as well, okay?
MELISSA: Yeah. That’s a very good point.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s really interesting to me because there’s something that’s coming up for me as we’re talking, which is Jim Collins in
Good to Great
, the classic book, where he brings out the whole theme of good leaders operate with realistic optimism. And I think that’s what we’re talking about here. It’s not about all of a sudden becoming this pessimist where you’re like, Nothing good is going to happen and everything is uncertain, damn it. But it’s also not being what you said, which is, “Okay, the chaos has happened. I’m just going to…”
MELISSA: Move on.
MURIEL WILKINS: … move on. Can’t happen again.” I remember somebody very wise once told me… Because I think Melissa, we’re a little similar in our optimism. Somebody very wise once told me there’s a very thin line between optimism and denial.
MELISSA: Ooh. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I of course said, “That’s such a pessimist thing to say.”
MELISSA: I don’t understand what they meant, but yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t understand. I mean, so what does that mean to you?
MELISSA: I think for me, I’ve been in denial about the fact that there is more change that will come. That’s the huge, huge, huge… As I say, it scares me, but there will need to be more change. If you think about, I live in an area where earthquakes are a thing or could be a thing. But I’m learning that after a major earthquake, there are aftershocks, but I’ve been in denial about the aftershocks.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, if we were to… Keeping with the theme of 12 months from now. If 12 months from now we had a check-in and you say, “Oh my gosh, Muriel, I went from being an optimist to being a realistic optimist,” what would be the difference for you? What would the way that you behave or operate or act, how different would it look?
MELISSA: The biggest thing is the holding on loosely to commitments and plans. That would be the biggest one. I would be able to say we adjusted our plans and we were okay with it. It wasn’t something that we did through painful pain and suffering, but it was something that we were prepared for and something that we did with grace and everything still turned out well. The second thing will be, I will have more peace with how things turn out, even if they’re different, and they will be different from what I thought they’ll be starting this year. I mean, this… Yeah, it’s already different. So I guess it’s finding the peace with the fact that it is different, and that’s okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s okay.
MELISSA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think this is really about being okay, not necessarily being okay with what happened. It’s being okay with the fact that you will be okay. Okay, we’ve covered a lot. I’d love to hear from you where you are now versus where you were when we started this conversation.
MELISSA: I think for me, the biggest learning or the biggest thoughts that I have now that I did not have coming into this was it’s okay that I feel the way I’m feeling. That has been, through the conversation, I’m like, It has been massive change. A lot has happened in a short period of time. My sense of safety was rocked. So, it’s okay that I feel the way I’m feeling. That’s the biggest thing. And I haven’t given myself the time to think about it. So, I think coming to terms with that was the first gift, or is the first gift that I’ve been given through the conversation. The second one is around the practical framing and something that makes sense to me around the accepting uncertainty and being okay with it, knowing that at the end of the day, everything will be okay. I’ll be fine, the team will be fine, the work will be fine. I think that’s another big item for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Beautiful. And I can’t wait a year from now to hear what fine looks like, maybe even sooner.
MELISSA: Yeah, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m trying to be a realistic optimist. We’re going to keep each other accountable there, MELISSA, okay?
MELISSA: I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Facing something like an economic downturn or mass layoffs at a company never feels good for a leader. Of course, losing your job creates a large amount of stress, but sometimes we forget about those left behind, still working at the company who now have their own sense of normalcy rocked. This conversation brought to light a lot of things to keep in mind, even in other situations of uncertainty, to remember to focus on what you can and can’t control, to not hold on too tightly to the way things were, and perhaps most importantly, remembering what drives you in all that you do and staying true to that. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
EPISODE 2 GUEST: We’re finding that there’s so much change constantly happening around us that we’re not sure what our motivation is. Why do we do what we do? Is it impactful? How do I keep myself motivated and keep my team motivated because of these constant changes in the environment?
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of this episode? Join the
Coaching Real Leaders
community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant, Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: Should I Push To Make My Interim Leadership Role Permanent?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Anna to protect her confidentiality. She’s been in her current industry for less than 10 years after making a notable career pivot.
ANNA: … that’s have been doing boutique-y work and sort of non-corporate, really small scale, small business scale work. But I’d had a lot of exposure to working with people and other businesses in other industries that were in these pretty large interesting structures. And what I wanted to do is work in a central service and watch a whole lot of people do their jobs and figure out which one I wanted. I started on a temporary contract as an administrator and have sort of worked my way up, and it’s happened really, really quickly. I really found a discipline that I loved and hit my stride. I spend my weekends and evenings listening to podcasts about it, and I’ve been a real duck to water.
MURIEL WILKINS: Anna had a lot of success in this new field relatively quickly, and she’s now serving in an interim position at a senior executive level. That interim role had an initial time period attached to it, a timeframe that has now doubled. And so Anna is faced with an increasingly pressing choice. Is this the right role for me? Should I try to make it permanent?
ANNA: I’m finding it a really tough decision, because I am not usually indecisive about this kind of thing. And I think probably for the first time in my life, I might have a bit of imposter syndrome. I usually feel very confident about what I can and can’t do. If I say I can’t do something, I probably can’t. I am usually very confident about those decisions for myself, and I’m not confident about this one. Really, I don’t know what I think. I don’t know how I want to move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Since this is still currently an interim position, Anna feels a sense of pressure of the use the opportunity or lose it variety and is hoping to get more clarity on whether this role truly is the right fit for her. So she’s prepared if and when the company asks her to make a choice. The fact that this feels different, that Anna usually feels confident and decisive got my attention. So let’s start as I ask her, what are the skills and strengths she has that she thinks helped her advance so quickly in her career?
ANNA: I think that a lot of the execution in this function is common sense. A lot of it is about courage and people skills and leadership skills and connection and a collaborative inclination. It’s about problem solving and thinking about people and challenges and change in a way that is a little bit out of the box, but also is, I think, courageous is really the word. I think it’s easy to get bogged down within this discipline and technical problem solving or framework or methodologies and that kind of thing, and I just don’t really do that. I sort of look at what’s in front of us and solve problems with that information and with the people who are involved rather than relying on technical things that you might find in a manual. And I think having as little experience as I have is in some ways an advantage. I’m not inhibited by the way that other people do this. I was talking to my team, and we were batting around a problem that we were having, and I was on one side of the argument, and they were all on the other. And I said, “Well, look. Let’s get to the crux of why we believe what we’re believing here.” And really, they were uncomfortable because the solution that I was pitching was unusual. It was something that none of them had ever seen. And I heard myself say something like, “Guys, this is not your mother’s team. We are doing something new. We are not going to be doing it the way that other people have done it.” And look, I let them overrule me in that conversation. I didn’t slam through my weird idea without anybody else’s support. I didn’t think that was going to be an overall win. But it was really interesting, because even the team that I’ve built, who are innovative and forward-thinking and future-oriented around this industry and what we can be, they’re inhibited sometimes by the way that things have been done. And I think my core advantage and my core skill in the rise that I’ve been able to have has been just to not rest on the laurels of traditional or old habits in the space. I’ve had a lot of luck. I’ve been lucky to be able to be in a good position to seize the opportunities that I’ve had, and I’ve also had a lot of help from people in my network. I’ve had a lot of trust put in me. I’ve been able to talk to people very honestly and get really good support, and people have taken risks to let me come into something that is very unknown and sink or swim.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what has been your experience in the interim role?
ANNA: That’s a really hard question to answer. I really enjoy it. I have a lot of fun. Most days of the week, I wake up and feel excited by it. I have had to learn things really fast, and it’s been really cool, because sometimes it can be hard to know when you’re learning. It’s hard to identify that for yourself sometimes. But I’ve had a really steep learning curve in this, and I know that, because I look at programs or things that I’m working on that have been running for a few months, and I go, “If I was starting that now, I would start it differently. I would be starting from a different place in how I tackled that.” So the learning opportunity has been fantastic. I have a good relationship with everybody on the executive team, including my CEO. There are some variation there, of course. There are some who I spend a lot more time with and some who I spend a little bit of time with. But overall, I’ve built really good relationships, and I feel that I have their support for the most part. So look, it’s been good. It’s been challenging. It’s really put me out of my depths a number of times. And the things that are tricky about it are sometimes there are kind of no-win scenarios. Sometimes, you’re going to fall off the ledge one way or another. You’ve just got to pick which way. That’s been a challenge. I’ve never had challenges that I really thought I was going to, thought that there was no really good solution to. I just had to decide which way to fail. That’s been really interesting. It’s a big job. The workload is huge, the hours are huge, the commitment is huge. So there’s that. That’s been a challenge at times. And I think that the level of decision making and gumption and confidence that I’ve had to have has been a bit of a challenge. So look, it’s been really good. It’s been amazing from a learning perspective. I really do enjoy it. It has had an impact on me personally, like I am one of the considerations about whether I pitch myself for this or not is not letting my physical health and fitness deteriorate so much. I’m young, and I don’t want to give up my longevity for a job. That’s a really shortsighted thing. So there are challenges in there, and these are some of the things that are playing in my mind about the decision that I’ve got in front of me. But overall, I’ve had a great time.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what kind of feedback have you received, if any, in terms of how you have performed in the interim role?
ANNA: I have received relatively positive feedback. I had a really nice piece of feedback from the board chair recently, which is a pretty big deal, because I think I am as old as his grandkids. And so I think for him to acknowledge me as a professional is actually quite a big deal. So that was really good. I have a great relationship with my direct manager. We do have some conflicts about stuff. I think mostly positive. I think it’s hard for me to say. I’m finding it hard to gauge that, I think, is part of the problem. So what people are saying to me is positive, but I have context or some knowledge or some questions around that feedback that I’m getting directly. So we have a really high stakes, high performance culture, so there has also been certainly some critical feedback and some suggestions come my way as well from our top senior leadership. That to me, I mean, it’s been in proportion to what I hear others get. I don’t think that’s any worse already. More sort of an indicator of underperformance as it is for anybody else that I talk to pretty regularly. And it’s funny, because I’m hearing myself doubt that feedback as I’m talking, and I’m like, “I’m getting good feedback,” but I’m like, “but I don’t trust it.” And that’s really weird. I don’t know where that’s coming from, but I’m getting good feedback to my faith, but it’s not necessarily making me feel confident.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would make you feel confident?
ANNA: One of the things that I’m finding challenging about this role, I think, is that it’s quite lonely being head of a function, because it’s not appropriate to kind of share and talk to the team the way that I could when I had more peers. I’ve got no one to look to in a functional technical capacity who is more senior than me. I’ve got no one to role model from. And so I think that maybe why I’m finding this a bit harder to get a good gauge is because I’m used to being able to model off somebody, off a clear kind of north star of what good looks like. I don’t have that. And so I think I’m used to making up more of my own mind about my own performance, I think, and I don’t have the same data points that I would usually have to do that maybe.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, maybe.
ANNA: Maybe. I’m not sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I’m hearing you speak, and I hear the questions that you have in your mind, and I hear the doubt that you’ve articulated that you have. And I think it would be helpful to just break apart the problem statement or the question that you came with, which is do I put myself forward for the permanent role? Do I want this permanently, or do I not put myself? And actually let me correct that, because do I put myself forward for the permanent role or do I not is a different question than do I want the role? Because some people put themselves forward for a position even if they don’t want it, or some people want a position and don’t put themselves forward. And so let me actually start with that. Do you want it?
ANNA: Yeah, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What makes you want the role?
ANNA: I like the difference that I can make being in this seat. It brings me incredible joy and satisfaction to see the grounds that the team have gained and that the company has gained in the spaces that I have some direct influence over. I also really like not really being told what to do by anybody. That’s been quite good. Being kind of the master of your own destiny in a way that you don’t get if you’ve got a sort of a functional kid who’s paying a bit more attention to what you’re doing, I guess. Yeah, it’s fun, it’s challenging, it’s kind of engaging, it’s bursty and kind of full of spark and potential. I find it really energizing to be doing it. The impact that we’re able to have for the company is really satisfying. I get a lot out of that. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So there is a motivator there for you around wanting it.
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? It is something that you would want. Now the decision is do you go for what you want or do you not, right?
ANNA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let me ask you this. What would make you go for the role, pitch yourself for it?
ANNA: I would need to trust that I can really do it. It’s such a critical role, and it’s such a cool company. I wouldn’t ever want to sit in a job that I can’t actually do, and I would hate that personally, but also we’re at such an inflection point as a business, I wouldn’t want to be somewhere that somebody else could actually take it further. So that’s a big part of it. I’m not confident that I’m actually doing it the way that it could be done. And I know that’s not a real sentence because there’s 600 things that anybody could do and you only ever get to do 50 of them. So I know nobody’s perfect, but I would hate for the business to be limited by my lack of experience in that position. I’m not comfortable with that. The other piece is about, because I have compensated for a lack of experience by working incredibly hard, by doing the research, doing the checking, working with my network, working with my peers or my mentors to figure out the problem and make sure that there’s not something obvious that I’m missing just because I don’t have the experience or the exposure that somebody with a decade or more of experience would have. So I have put a lot into it. And I did that knowingly, but I did that knowing that I had a short run at it. I was like, “I can burn the candle for that length of time. That’ll be really interesting. Let’s go hard and make the most of it.” And now that gone on and on and on and on and on, and we’re several more months down the road, I’m like, “Okay, well, I’m not going to be able to do that forever. That’s not a sustainable way to do this.” And so I’ve started to claw back a bit of balance, but there’s still a question around that for me. So I need to feel confident that I can do it and do it well for the good of the business and for myself and for my team. And I need to know that it’s in my power to do it in a way that isn’t going to have long-term impacts for me in terms of health, fitness, family, diet, that sort of stuff, because it has come first.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes people come to coaching because they want to figure out where their gaps are or what they need to improve to achieve their long-term goals. Other times, there’s a specific, often time-sensitive problem that they’re looking to solve. Anna is one of those time-sensitive coaching clients because she has a decision to make. Now, one thing that often happens in these situations is the person I’m coaching to some extent is looking for answers from me, but my job isn’t to recommend either or. It’s to help them break down the problem they’re facing and the assumptions they’re making to figure out where the root of the challenge or decision is and what different paths forward might look like. Anna has already started that process of breaking the problem down into smaller pieces by introducing the idea that she both wants to know she’ll be good at the job and if taking the job will be good for her. We’re going to dive deeper now into looking at those two central issues and think about how she might come to a better understanding of fit. So you have broken it down to sort of two key central variables. And I cannot tell you whether you are right for the job. I just can’t. That would be very, very irresponsible and foolish of me. And I also can’t tell you whether it’s going to bring you the balance because I don’t know what type of balance you desire. How I define balance is different, I’m sure, than how you define balance. It might be the same, but I’m not going to presuppose that it’s the same. So I think it’d be worthwhile for us to help you get to a place of being able to make a decision. It’d be helpful to kind of break these apart a little bit more. And so with this piece around, I need to feel confident I can do it well and I can do it well for the sake of the team and the sake of the company rather than somebody else who has more experience than me or who I think could take it further, what would you need to feel confident that you could do this job well?
ANNA: I think it has to come from people who know what they’re talking about and who I trust, I guess. That is a thing. I have received overall positive feedback on it, but maybe I haven’t solicited that in a way that is going to really give me confidence that I’m getting the full picture from people because it’s hard work giving people feedback. I don’t ask that of people lightly. It’s a lot of work. So probably what I could do is set up some conversations to really prep people properly and get that buy-in from them that they’re willing to do it and get some really clear feedback from people. I can’t think of any other real way to do it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I think there’s two pieces to it. I think there is this external data point that you’re going to seek out, and then there’s also your internal data point, which is what do I believe and what do they believe? And then let me put those two together and does it give me enough of a sense of, yes, I can do this. And so what data do you have so far that makes you believe you can do the role and what data do you have so far that makes you believe you can’t do it?
ANNA: The data I have so far that says I can do it, that I’m still here and I’m still doing it and nobody’s told me to stop doing it, I think if it was a disaster, that would’ve happened. Nobody has done anything to look for a replacement. I mean, my team are really kicking goals this year. We set out with some pretty big ambitions and we’re really going to do all of it. Nothing’s perfect, but we’re really on a good wicket as a group and we’re delivery focused. And really we hit some big ambitions around how we wanted to work together and what we wanted to get done this year. And that’s really worked. I did have a couple of people internally within the team get a bit of a fright I think when I stepped up, and everybody’s come back on the bus. I haven’t had anybody leave that I’m concerned about, which has been really good over this time, out of the team. There’s some sort of organization metrics which we’re meeting. There’s no sort of red flags from a delivery perspective and the things that we do measure as well from a goals and KPIs perspective. There’s nothing going on that really gives me the sense that there’s anything wrong with the way that I’m delivering. Part of my questioning about it also I think is signing up to a permanent gig, which is a different kind of pressure, right? Saying that I can run the ship for a few weeks or months or however long this is going to end up being, years, that’s different to saying, “I will be the right thing into the future. I’m going to have enough to be able to do this into the future, and you can count on me for years to come.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, I think there is a difference. I think, I don’t know. I mean, I’m reflecting back on what you’re saying and I feel like I’m asking you what’s the weather? And you’re like, “It’s sunny. It’s sunny,” but I’m like, “Is it going to rain?” You’re like, “No, it doesn’t show rain, but it feels like there might be rain, but the weather forecast is not telling me there’s rain.” Well, yes, there’s always a possibility of rain, but you’re telling me it’s sunny and warm outside. So you’re not getting any data that says you can’t do this role.
ANNA: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Maybe what’s happening is more the notion of moving into it permanently and what are the implications of that in terms of what I’m signing up for and the pressure of it, right?
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So talk a little bit about that. What is it about that that is causing some hesitation on your end?
ANNA: The first thing is I think when I took the role, I had a very clear sort of tactical delivery set of objectives. Then I wrote, like I said, “This is what I’m going to be able to do over this period of time. Is this what you need?” And everyone said, “Yes, yes, yes, CEO,” and we did that. We did that. But tactics, I love tactics. Tactics are ready. It’s about lateral thinking and putting things together and problem solving and flipping it around. Fine. I don’t know that I really actually understand what people mean when they say strategy. I think sometimes people have different definitions of that, and if somebody asked me to put together a function strategy, I wouldn’t necessarily feel very confident in doing that. And it’s hard because I know when things are strategic and when they’re not. I know when somebody’s made a non-strategic decision. Those end up being quite obvious in hindsight. But I don’t know that I understand what that means and what people mean by it. And so taking it on. The other thing is I started to talk a little bit about the company being a really amazing company and it is. It is growing, and we are a purpose-driven company. We’re doing something really cool for the world, and man, we are rocketing in terms of growth. And so that’s people and dollars and infrastructure and geographic footprint. We are on a swing and man, it’s incredible. And so I think nobody knows what the future could be. Nobody knows where we’re headed. There are so many possibilities and the sky’s the limit in some ways. And I get worried, I feel worried that I’m trying to catch up to a role that’s growing exponentially as the company grows. Maybe it is imposter syndrome. I don’t know how to put my hand on my heart and say, “I’m going to be able to do this.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so here’s the thing. First of all, is it imposter syndrome? I don’t know. I’m not going to label it anything. It is whatever it is that you’re facing, right? We get caught up in is it this, is it that? It’s what you’re experiencing, which is can I do this role and can I stand the heat of it? I mean, here’s the thing. There’s two ways you can look at this. You can say, because you said, for example, if you talk about a functional strategy, you don’t know what that actually means and what that actually looks like. So at some point, you talked about early on in your career, you completely pivoted to something different that you had no idea what it was either. And you also talked about when you took the interim role, you invested in learning and came up a pretty steep learning curve to what it sounds like you’ve done pretty well. So I think the question really is not do I think I can do the role permanently. I think the question is, do I believe I can learn what it’s going to take to do the role permanently?
ANNA: Yeah, that’s a good question. And the answer to that is yes, because I really do trust myself to figure things out. I am good at learning on the fly and as we’re doing it, and I do trust myself to learn fast enough.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you’re not learning it from scratch. I mean, you’ve had a pretty good warmup to learn it in terms of being in the interim role. So based on what you just said, it sounds like at least we can check off the box that you have confidence in your ability to ramp up to what the role will expect. I think there’s a question around what are the full expectations of the role? Do they mirror what you have done so far in the interim or is there more to it? And I think that’s what you need to find out by talking to your boss and some of your peers. What do they expect of somebody who sits in this role permanently? Is it the same as what you’ve been doing or is it different?
ANNA: Yeah. Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So that then you can make an assessment of A; can I learn these things? And then B; very importantly, do I want to learn these things?
ANNA: Yeah. What’s it going to cost?
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Do I want to? Right. So there’s a difference between having confidence in doing the thing, which if you wait for that, you will almost never start anything versus having confidence in our ability to, one; learn how to do the thing, and secondly; put in the effort to do the thing.
ANNA: Yeah. And it’s interesting that I never shy away from putting in the work. I love a challenge. I’m a bit of a… I enjoy that stuff. It’s talked a little bit about some of the personal cost for it and it’s about velocity. It’s about how quickly all of this is going to come to fruition for the company and what that means. And that’s just about how many things to get my head around and get my arms around and how quickly that needs to happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. That has implications on then, do you want to do it? I think we need to establish first, can you do it? And if the can you do it is really about, can you learn how to do it? You just answered the question. You said, “Yes, I think I could learn how to do it.” Now we can move to, “Okay, now do you really want to exercise that right to learn how to take on a role like this on a permanent basis in this environment or in this construct.” Okay. And what seems to be concerning you is the impact that it has on your health, your wellbeing, your personal life. Is that what it is?
ANNA: Yeah. And it’s also about, I really believe that you have to… People go up and down. You always have patches that you feel 100% or 90% versus 60%. That’s fine and that’s expected. And to really be really good, to really be a whole and interesting contributor at work, you do have to be a healthy person. You’ve got to have balance that… It’s not just about getting to do the things you want to do in personal life, that’s really important. But that to me is not the only thing. It’s also about being able to do it in a healthy way for myself, but also for the team, for the company. I have burnt out of a career before. I know what that feels like. I know what the impact is to you, and to the people around you, and to the business, and to the commitments that you’ve made. It’s a pretty bad time for everybody if that happens. And so I feel there is a piece to me that’s like, “Yeah, I want to sign off at five o’clock [inaudible 00:29:09].” But the other piece of that is if I don’t think I can do it happily and sustainably and well, I would rather not go through that experience again, for me, but also for my people and for the company.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
ANNA: It’s about balance. And I’m trying not to sound like I’m entirely oriented around work because I feel like that’s coming through in this conversation, but part of it is about sustainability for my own good, but for the good of the job and the business as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So two things. One is I would offer you to think about the interim experience that you’ve had, as the interim experience. You were starting out. If you move on and take this permanently, you will not be just starting out. That moment has passed. It will not be chapter one all over again. You yourself said, you came up a pretty steep learning curve you’re not going to go right back down the learning curve. As you know with learning curves, they plateau out a little bit or the curve just becomes less steep over time. So you’ve put in that initial time, and my sense is, given the time you’ve put in, you’re at the point where the incline is not going to be as steep. So let’s just, I think, partly to put a timestamp on what you’ve been through and not assume that what you’ve been through is exactly what’s going to be replicated as you take on the more permanent role. So that’s one. I think the second thing is let’s talk about, let’s be a little imaginary here, hypothetical. What would it look like for you to take on a role like this and feel like it’s sustainable? What would need to be in place?
ANNA: I’m not sure. I don’t know. I actually don’t know. I don’t know what would make me feel… because I haven’t deteriorated. I have a little bit, my fitness has, I used to be a better cyclist than I am, but I haven’t deteriorated in terms of energy. I still feel really engaged and really optimistic and really good about my life and my job and all of that stuff. I think it’s physical health. I think it’s committing to looking after my body a bit better. Work is part to blame for that and the other part is just not feeling like it on a Thursday afternoon. But I think it would be about committing to a physical health goal and moving towards that because I just don’t want to let that go.
MURIEL WILKINS: And whose decision is that, whether to let it go or not?
ANNA: It’s mine, obviously. There are things… No, it’s mine. It’s mine. It’s like there are crises, there are fires, there’s a lot of travel involved with this role. But that’s for me to sort out, it’s just about prioritizing.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s just about prioritizing. And it is yours, it really is. I wish I could say, “Yeah. Damn the role.” But it is about prioritizing and it is about making a decision and a commitment and saying, “Hey, here’s important to me. What’s important to me is my physical health. And one of the ways that I sustain that is by committing to a certain activity that I do as consistently as possible. And I don’t need to be 100% all the time, but let me aim for 80. And so how do I demonstrate that this is a priority for me?” And that’s where we get into the nuts and bolts. When I was in business school a very long time ago, the dean of the business school back then, every day at lunchtime, would go out for a run. Every day, every day. And if you couldn’t get on his calendar, people would say, “Well, you have the choice. You could go running with him at lunchtime.” He said, “I’m more than open than company.” But the run was non-negotiable. It happened every single day when he was in town, lunchtime, we all knew where he was. So as you grow in scope, as you grow in responsibility, things on the outside are not going to come to you and say, “Hey, here’s what’s important. Fit it in.” It really is going to be up to you to decide, “Hey, if this is what I want to do, if this is the commitment that I take on for a role, for a team, for whatever it is, how do I make it work in a way that also works for me?” There’s an and rather than them being mutually exclusive.
ANNA: Yeah. I think as I said, because I hit it like it was a fixed term commitment, and I was like, “Well, I’m going to go into that and give that everything, and then I’ll deal with the carnage on the other side of doing that.” I think over that period, I definitely let things go a bit. And I think it’s about shifting the way I’m thinking about that now. Especially if I’m going to go for broke and see whether I can secure it permanently. So I think I’ve got stuck putting it second or putting everything second really, because that was a short term agreement that I had with myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, In a way, you approached the interim as, “This is a short-term sprint, so I’m going to go all out.”
ANNA: It was meant to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. It was meant to be, so you did the right thing. You were like, “I’m going to go all out and then I’m going to recover at the end.”
ANNA: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then, oh, lo and behold, the sprint became a marathon.
ANNA: Well, it has. I really did believe it was a sprint, but that was… If you’d asked me at the very beginning of this engagement, “Are you still going to be doing this X months down the road?” I would’ve said, “Absolutely not. The business is going to need something else. Once I’ve done these four things that I’ve said, they’re going to need some heavy hitting capability in this space.” I really did believe it was a sprint and that transition to non sprint. I’m in the middle zone now, we’re in a half-marathon, shall we say. And I think maybe just the looking at it stretching out in front or the potential of that distance continuing to increase. There has to be a point in time where I have to go, “Okay. Well, if you’re still doing this in two years, what does that look like? What’s the…?
MURIEL WILKINS: What it looks like is you don’t approach it as a sprinter anymore. You don’t approach it as a sprint anymore because it’s not a sprint. You approach it as a half-marathon, a marathoner, or whatever you want to call it. You approach it for what it is, a longer term engagement. And so yes, there’s a certain pace, but you now have to adapt your pace and your sustainability. What is the type of sustainability that you want to approach it with and that you need to approach it with? So there’s a bit of a mismatch in what’s happened. You have transposed what your experience has been as an interim and what you thought was be a very short-term interim role, and you have taken that and put it on, “This is what’s going to be required of me in the permanent position.” And we don’t know if that’s true.
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then the other part is, as you said, you said, “I’m going to give it all in and then whatever happens, happens. I’ll be able to deal with it on the other side.” And now the other side looks much further away. So you better deal with it now, right?
ANNA: Yeah, I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Deciding whether or not to go after a permanent role that you’ve been doing on a temporary basis has a whole set of challenges that are different than pursuing a job at a new organization. In some ways, Anna is in a great position as she’s already had practice doing the role. She also has a clear set of concerns, one around whether she would be the best fit for the role, or is it too much of a stretch. And the other around what kind of commitment it would require of her. But now I think she reached an important realization that how she approached the role as the interim isn’t necessarily how she needs to approach it as the permanent leader. Thus far, she’s treated it like a sprint, but if the position becomes permanent, she’d have to pace herself differently. So a key piece for Anna to think about while making this decision is not only how she’s experienced the job thus far, but figuring out what conditions would need to be in place to make the role work for her. This can help narrow in on the choices she has and get closer to making a decision. So at this point, I did want to check in with Anna to see how she was feeling, and if she had gained any more clarity on this potentially looming decision. Will she go for the permanent role?
ANNA: I think I should, I think I should, there’s still no guarantee. It’s not only my decision as to how this progresses, but I think I should try.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And so first of all, congratulations on getting to decision point number one, right? Question number one. How do you feel saying that, by the way?
ANNA: Good.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right.
ANNA: I mean, comfortable is not a word I would use, but it feels… Well, I mean, comfortable. Come on. Who wants to be comfortable? It feels right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It feels right. Okay. So now the question then becomes, now what? What are you thinking in terms of how you put yourself forward or do you have any questions or concerns about that?
ANNA: While I’ve been thinking about this and I have gone back and forward over the last few months, if somebody had said to me, “Do you want it, would you go for it?” I think I’ve been pretty on the fence. And some days it’s yes, some days it’s no, most days it’s somewhere in between. I think the challenge that I have is that every month that goes by, I get better at it. And so the longer I delay a decision, the more likely it is to go in my favor if I do want to pursue the role. And so there’s kind of two competing timelines really where for me, the later I push that conversation, the more likely I’m to have really shown good stuff and be taken seriously as a candidate. The other timeline though is that I think the business are waiting for me to make a move because I went into the interim and said, “I’m going to do these things and I’ve done them,” and I had a really interesting discussion with my manager recently where they said, “Right, so that’s what you said you were going to do and you’ve done it. Now what are you going to do?” We were talking very practically, we were talking from a delivery perspective and a team focused perspective, but I heard a slightly different message there saying, “Are you going to make you move or not,” basically. So I think there’s an expectation they’re waiting to see, I think whether I’m going to push and whether I’m going to ask and whether I’m going to put myself forward assertively or not, because I think it’s going to get to a point where if I haven’t moved, they’re going to go, “Well, that’s not a strong enough signal that she’s interested and ready and willing to go for it.” So it’s about those two timelines kind of coming together and I think that’s going to be soon.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Well, I kind of hear it also, it’s about who’s going to wait it out the longest, right? On the one hand, you’re waiting to prove yourself quote, unquote to be good enough that they will naturally say you should be in the role. And on the other hand, they’re waiting for you to say, “I am good enough. I want the role.”
ANNA: Yeah, I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: And which one would you rather be in? Because you could play either way.
ANNA: Definitely the second one, the business is not the kind of business where you wait for somebody to hand you something. If you want it, you go for it. So if I want it, and you’ve managed to make me say that out loud, Muriel, so if I want it, then I’ve got to go for it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve got to go for it. Okay. And so what does going for it mean?
ANNA: I think I’m putting an offer on the table. I think I’m saying this is what I want, this is my commitment, let’s talk about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
ANNA: I think what I’m doing is prompting a conversation and bringing your decisions to [inaudible 00:42:48].
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. It sounds like you’ve answered your questions.
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What question still remains for you?
ANNA: No, I think I’ve answered my question. It’s been really interesting. It’s been a really interesting few months and the shift to the permanent role, I think I have the right support from the team. I think the time’s right. I think it’s good timing. I’m not going to learn that much more by going beyond a year. Either way, I’m going to have an interesting conversation with my execs. And so I think that’s right. And the thing is, if the answer is not yet, that’s okay too. Because what that means is that they’re going to have to find someone pretty good to give me a run for my money. Really, I mean, I would be pretty disappointed for somebody to come in who wasn’t really, really knowing what they’re doing. And so what that means is if that happens, I’ll do a different interesting job. There’s plenty to do. I’m certainly staying with the business and learn from someone for a few years. The other thing that held me back, I guess, is I was talking to one of the other exec team recently who’s a bit further on in their career, and I said, “What are you going to do next?” And they said, “I might just start my retirement journey from here.” They were sort of saying, “Well, this is probably the biggest job I’m going to have. This is kind of me. I’m going to do this for as long as I want to do it, and maybe then I’ll go part-time.” They were on the other side, and that was a really tough conversation for me. I was like, “Wow, what do I do next?” This is the job that I thought I would have peak career, I guess. And so I think I’ve also found that a bit intimidating.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I mean, that could be it for you and it could not be. That’s his story. That’s how he wants to write his story. This is really about how you want to write your story, and I would offer you to take it one step at a time. See what happens with this one. They’re either going to say, “Yes, you’ve got the permanent role,” or they’re going to say, “Not yet.” Right? And then you can make a decision from there.
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. But you are a different person than your peer, and so whether this is the final chapter or not, who the heck knows?
ANNA: No. I mean, I certainly don’t think so. It’s just weird to have… I’ve usually got something on the horizon and it’s funny not to have that. And I think securing this, if I do manage to do that, it’s a bit of a then what?
MURIEL WILKINS: Then what?
ANNA: I mean, I’m sure I’m not going to have to think about that in the day-to-day. I’m sure I’ll have plenty of other things to be on my mind, but yeah, it did cause me pause when we were talking about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: That might be worth some reflection at some point. What is your bigger vision for yourself over and beyond this role? Where do you want to spend your career energy? What’s the impact that you want to make overall, regardless of where you are? And then asking, is this role if you take it on permanently, is it in service of that or how can it be in service of that? So that’s part of your homework. That’s the macro homework. Okay, let’s talk about the micro homework. So what are you going to do? What are your action steps coming out of this?
ANNA: I need to sit down and go, “Okay, so if this were mine and I knew it was going to be mine for the next 36 months, what am I doing? What do I want to do for the business?” And it’s funny because one of the things I said earlier in this conversation is I don’t know how to write a strategy, and that’s exactly what I would do to write a strategy, isn’t it? Okay. But I just haven’t been doing that. Interesting. Sit down and go write year one, year two, year three in the role so that when my boss and my board will say, “What would that mean?” I have a really clear answer to say, “If you give me this opportunity, this is what I’m going to do with it.” I think that’s the first thing is to get really clear about my pitch. How am I going to pitch myself to help them understand that really they should be giving me this opportunity? And then the next one is just to get that… I mean, I’d probably talk to a few people I trust about that and get some feedback and make sure that that was in touch with the business like we’re big, complicated beast in some ways, and it is really easy to be out of touch sometimes and if you’re not thinking or talking to the right people. So I think checking that with some other functional heads and people outside of the company as well. And then it’s scheduling a meeting, working through the other details. What do I want? What do I want in terms of package? What do I want in terms of commitment from the business [inaudible 00:47:52] resourcing against this work? What am I looking for in return? And then scheduling a meeting, making the case.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, and what’s your timeframe?
ANNA: I would want to be doing it in the next month. I would like to have a decision within the next month on that, I think.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Well, that sounds like a commitment to making a decision if I ever heard one.
ANNA: No, it’s good. I mean, yeah, we’ve got a pass. Which is funny because I feel like I’ve gone round and round and round and round and round on this months. It feels really good actually to have something defined.
MURIEL WILKINS: And sometimes we just have to put a stake in the ground.
ANNA: Yeah, no, it’s good. It’s good to feel like we’ve got a stake. Totally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Good. Good.
ANNA: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: One word that describes how you feel now versus how you felt at the beginning of the conversation.
ANNA: I think I feel determined. I don’t know whether that is the right word. That was hard to get me one shot at that. It could be the term that it could be I feel a little bit lighter, like sort of having a plan is good, just kind of having something to pursue and I feel excited.
MURIEL WILKINS: Those are all good things.
ANNA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Those are all good things. Terrific. Thank you. Thank you so much.
ANNA: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we’re faced with a tough decision in our personal lives or at work, we can often get stuck, ruminating over all the pros and cons about the possible choices we can make. Sometimes the root to clarity comes from really unpacking the uncertainty of it all and recognizing what is at the root of the ambivalence. It’s about undoing the knot of the back and forth with yourself and keeping your values and long-term goals in mind. Remembering those guideposts and breaking the decision down into easy, digestible thoughts goes a long way. And so does doing your homework, taking the time to think through your questions, talking it out, writing down what you want, because even a decision with a deadline, like choosing whether or not to commit to a permanent role, still takes some time. And for those of you wondering, Anna did make her choice. She reached back out later to let us know she is in fact now in this role on a permanent basis. That’s it for this episode of Coaching Real Leaders. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: What I think has been the harder part actually, is the stakeholder side now that I have to coach individuals and not have direct contact to the stakeholders they’re dealing with. That has been, I guess, the longer learning curve for me. It’s how I’m able to indirectly coach towards those stakeholder relationships that is taking longer for me to be truly effective in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer, Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com and of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: How Do I Lead My Team without Strategic Direction from the Top?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach, who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump, by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting, focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Michael to protect his confidentiality. He’s been at his company for some time, and several years ago was given the chance to build his own team within the broader organization, with the goal of helping individuals and teams do their job better. It’s an innovative team, at a large global organization, but Michael is finding it hard to tell if the team is still having its intended impact.
MICHAEL: Within the team, we’re constantly talking about our success stories – constantly talking about the different groups that we’re working with and how they’re constantly coming back to us saying, “I need more of you in the organization. We need more people like you.” And that’s to everybody in the team. People saying, “We need more of that.” And then when we think of beyond that into the higher levels of hierarchy and up to, say, the C-level, there’s not as much stickiness or even whether they know we exist.
MURIEL WILKINS: Michael has a passion for helping others succeed inside and outside of work, and he was excited by the challenge of his job. So, he’s pretty motivated by his work. But beyond navigating the complexity of running a unique team at a large organization, he’s also finding it hard to get his bearings, as the leadership team keeps changing course,
MICHAEL: We’re finding that there’s so much change constantly happening around us that sometimes we are not sure what our motivation is. Why do we do what we do? Is it impactful? How do I keep myself motivated and keep my team motivated because of these constant changes in the environment?
MURIEL WILKINS: We begin our coaching conversation now as I ask Michael to share more about the exact kind of change his organization and team are facing, and why it’s so hard to navigate.
MICHAEL: The biggest challenge is the fact that there’s a lot of change. So, I will say that number one, at our top level, C-level, board level, just this year, we have four changes already. As we go down a couple layers, there’s a lot of changes happening there as well. And within 24 months, changing boss twice. Whole structure above that changing. And my team even adding individuals. So of course, the traditional, all right, we’ve got a lot of change within and people challenging each other of what is our direction? Are we aligned? Do we have the same understanding of our own vision and mission that we have had for the last five years? Because of all these different changing elements at the different layers, how do I keep everybody motivated when sometimes I don’t know if I have that right motivation?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, when you say, “How do I keep everyone motivated or even how do I keep myself motivated,” motivated to what end? To do what?
MICHAEL: I would say, to keep delivering the high quality of what we do. To not get bogged down in minutia. I don’t want to have to create all this extra work whereby other higher level people might be saying, “You’ve got to do that. You’ve got to create these unnecessary, extra work to then deliver your actual work.” So, we have people in the team saying, “If I’ve got to do that kind of stuff, I’m not motivated to work here. I don’t want to be in this kind of environment, if they’re going to be forcing this extra work.” And like I say, with the changing layers, we just don’t know where they’re going with those potential requests.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And so are those requests keeping you from doing what you’ve articulated around “the what,” want to be motivated towards? Are they keeping you from delivering the high quality work of what you do?
MICHAEL: At this very moment, not so much. The concern is not knowing whether the new leaders will shift into that. Now, I met with my new boss, and something was jokingly commented, “Well, as long as you charge them.” And that kind of line in our organization is very well known that it means you’ve got extra work you have to do upfront. There’s all this extra reporting and system entry, et cetera. I took it as a joke, and I chuckled with him. And I laughed and I said, “Well, you know how we work.” I never got real clarity on it, and I’m hoping to do so in the future. But as soon as that information gets to my team, they’re saying, “Okay, what’s the answer?”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s not necessarily that you’re worried you won’t be able to deliver effectively. You’re just worried that they’re going to be requesting that you do the work in a way that doesn’t really fit with the way that you’d like to do the work?
MICHAEL: The way that we fits. Yes, that’s the right way of saying it. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Because, I think part of this is making sure that you don’t lose what the prize is, right? Keep your eye on the prize. And I don’t know what the prize is. That’s why I keep checking in with you. So I’ll just repeat it again. I think what you said is, “Hey, I need to be motivated and keep my team motivated so that we can deliver quality work.” And so is that the end goal for you? Is that what keeps you motivated?
MICHAEL: By saying that I am the prize, that helps it reframe for me as well. So the quality work is, of course, the focus of what we do. One thing that we proposed was taking the concept of who my team is and expanding it beyond my team, but not creating headcount. So creating a bigger network. Being able to teach and coach other people on the skills that we have. Building up their capabilities. We presented it in a way that somebody said, “Well, you’ve got to get approval. You got to present it to get approval so that you can then move it forward.” And when we presented it was met with cricket. We’ve been chipping away at that little by little. And so that big prize in the end is how far can we reach out that network, such that everybody sees us as that center – call it the center of excellence – where they would come to us. This would be the central, and then, yes, we’ve got all this network of capable experts. So that bigger prize is how can we expand that, with the blessings of competing leaders? So that C-level, you’re going to have competing leaders who are going to say, “Well, maybe that’s in my area,” or “Maybe that’s in my area.” And how do we make sure that that expands?
MURIEL WILKINS: And why is that expansion important to you?
MICHAEL: For the company. Really for the sake of being able to have the company grow and learn and to stay competitive, to stay relevant. I will say that, for me, I’m really only about eight to 10 years from retirement. And I don’t want to be in a position of having to look elsewhere. I want to be at a company… And this is a strong company. It’s one of the largest in the industry we’re in. And we should be able to make those adjustments so that we can continue into the future. And I want to have an impact with the larger network that we can create to make the company work.
MURIEL WILKINS: So clearly, I’m sensing from you both a very strong belief and passion around the need for the type of work that you do, that you and your team do. And that it falls within, quite frankly, the survival of the company, it almost sounds like, right. In order for you to be able to compete at a certain level as an organization, this is a requirement.
MICHAEL: It is. And I have seen it at other companies within this same industry where they’ve made similar shifts like that we are suggesting. And in those companies, it was required for them to move forward, to have the leaps that they’ve had, and in some cases even the survival of their companies.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’re kind of ready. The question is, is anybody calling?
MICHAEL: And we have a few. Like I say, we have some, but I’m not sure that they’re the top line leaders that we want to be working with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Who are the top line leaders that you want to be working with? What is the difference between the ones you’re working with and the ones that you want to be working with?
MICHAEL: The classic terms would be the C-level, the C-suite, and the board of management. So some of their reports, those senior VP levels who are driving a lot of the topics, driving a lot of the desire for change and transformation. Those, we feel, are where we need to have the impact. We currently work with a lot of the middle management layers, but not cracking that ceiling.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what would cracking that ceiling look like?
MICHAEL: First and foremost, like you said earlier, getting the call. If we could be getting those calls, if we could be getting from some of those higher levels of like, “Oh, this is the group to work with. This is the team. We know you exist, and we’re coming to you regularly.” I would love to be seeing an explosion of requests from that type of person. I would like to see that their requests are relevant to the bigger frame of what we’re saying of, “Well, we’re not just here to facilitate a moment for you. We’re here to help you actually transform. And we want to coach and work with you with your work and continue that relationship.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And what do you think is getting in the way of the calls being made from the top, at the order of magnitude that you would like?
MICHAEL: Getting in the way? I think that the easy… It sounds like an excuse, and trust me, I’m not a fan of excuses. I even used the German phrase [German 00:11:30] with my kids to say, “No excuses.”
MURIEL WILKINS: No excuses.
MICHAEL: It feels like there’s not enough promotion and not enough marketing. Then on the flip side, we get requests at the layers that we’re working with, and it’s a lot. So the competing prioritization of do we just keep doing the work we do, or do we go and promote?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it sounds like what you’re saying is what’s missing, the missing link in order to be able to have the impact that you’d like to have, is not enough promotion to those more senior levels. And the reason why the promotion’s not happening is that there’s not enough time in the day, because you have these requests coming from the mid-level.
MICHAEL: Correct. And all the time being spent in all the intake and the communication with those requests. And then within the team and understanding, hey, who’s got what work and who’s doing this and that and the other. It’s literally some of the stuff we are trying to teach others. We’re trying to teach them to carve out X number of amount of time for other things. And we’re stuck, not able to walk the talk. Stuff that we can’t walk the talk. It’s like…
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. So, Michael, I mean, here’s what I’m really curious about. What if it was one of your internal clients coming to you with this issue? As their coach, what would you be coaching your internal client to do in the exact same situation?
MICHAEL: It’s funny you asked that because there was a moment, I had lunch with one of my colleagues on Friday and we were talking a little bit about the same, and I said, why aren’t we carving our 15 to 20% of time per week? Why aren’t we carving that out and being very focused on what is inside that space? Why aren’t we doing that? Part of the response was don’t know. The other part of the response was, well, because we have so much to do, there are so many of these people are asking for help.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. But isn’t part of what you do again, I have a very elementary understanding, but isn’t part of what you do with your clients and say, okay, how can you get done what you need to get done in 70% of your time?
MICHAEL: It is. It is a lot of that. Yeah, that’s why I say, it’s walking the talk.
MURIEL WILKINS: Michael, I feel like we’re having a very existential moment right now.
MICHAEL: I literally wrote Walk the Talk.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s step back for a minute here to think about where Michael is in this coaching session. He came to the session with a problem around creating clarity and goals for his team when the levels above him in the organization not only lacked some of that clarity, but also the consistency of people in some of the highest level roles. Michael created this team as a way to step out of the usual ways of doing things at this organization and to think about how they could better guide leaders from across the company, but he’s finding himself lacking some of the clarity he encourages in others because of the pace of change at the levels above him. Walking the talk is important here, which means Michael can apply some of the tactics he uses to help others and apply them in his own situation. Where can he take control and find some structure in the chaos? I asked Michael, what could he specifically do to help his team reach their goals and gain more traction within the organization? What would it look like for you and your team to walk the talk and instead of saying, Hey, it’s one or the other, we either meet the demands of middle management or we promote to senior levels. What would that look like?
MICHAEL: One of the phrases we say often is, what am I saying no to? So if there’s something coming in and we’re going to talk about prioritization and should we pick up that work, the phrase to ourselves is, well, what am I saying no to? What thing on my list gets me prioritized so that we can keep that 20% time protected and I have that amount of time blocked off to be able to say, we’re going to put some focused effort on promotion. We’re going to put some focused effort on the actual conversation with those senior leaders.
MURIEL WILKINS: So that’s one question. What are the other questions, like let’s see two or three, that you think you can use to coach you and your team to be able to move closer towards this better vision of what you would like to be in terms of both doing the work and promoting the work?
MICHAEL: One question that I’d want to ask has to go into the direction of their motivation. What are the things that are really motivating you or whatever it is that you’re working on? So that would be a question about, let’s talk about their motivation. Supplemental to that is, okay, tell me more about what’s motivating for say that next move, the next big move, for either you or for the team. Don’t just focus on what we’re doing today, but what is the motivation for the next big move. Do we grow to X number, which might be double or triple the size of who we are or how do you step into a role, another leadership role that could be just as big as the team that we have? So it’s about that regression for your career.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I mean, I think where we’re landing here, Michael, is this is an amazing opportunity to kind of be a little bit mad scientist and treat yourself as the client. Right. And even posing that as the challenge to your team. It’s like you’re the protagonist of your own case study. Because if you all are not able to be agile in this moment of tremendous change, as you’ve said, if you all can’t walk the talk around being able to respond to change and apply all the tools that you coach and you want to coach the entire organization on, then why should anybody else do it?
MICHAEL: That’s so true. So if I turn that around as you pose here, if I turn that around to my own motivation and I think about being in the position I am, it’s kind of, when it landed in my lap and it was that, oh my gosh, here’s an opportunity to really grow with this challenge. And being seen as the expert’s nice. That’s not part of my motivation. It’s I get to grow a team to this level of success, to this level of impact. So I had a mentor and one of the things he had said to me was this ability to recognize talent in the same kind of concept here of I’m always looking for that talent. So for me, the motivation is how much more can we grow this team slash network to just be so impactful for the organization that they’re writing the book, they’re writing the book of who we are and what we’ve done and all the successes we’ve had. I don’t care if I write the book, I want this for the people that I get to work with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. I just want to kind of circle back to this word motivation that you’ve used,
MICHAEL: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: A lot, right?
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I sense you, I mean you’ve articulated it. You’re kind of seeking for the motivation that when you took this role, the motivation was way up, right? Over index. Because guess what?
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It was a brand spanking new opportunity. Nothing had been written. This is like this for everything.
MICHAEL: Right. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: When it’s new and shiny and we don’t really know, but everything just looks ahead of us. We’re highly motivated, and then we get into it and we’re like, oh crap, this isn’t what we thought it would be. So I want to talk a little bit about that with you breaking down this word, motivation.
MICHAEL: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And again, check me on this. It sounds like you’re highly motivated by impact.
MICHAEL: It’s sort of like winning on the soccer field.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. Awesome.
MICHAEL: It’s sort of like that. You got to be gracious losers, but we’re trying to win.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re trying to win. So you are motivated by the outcome. You’re motivated by the final score.
MICHAEL: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: What else can you be motivated by? And you can use your soccer. I’m going to show my lack of knowledge around this sport, but maybe I know more than I think, but you can use that, right, as a metaphor. What else, as the coach,
MICHAEL: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Can you be motivated by over and beyond the win? The win is important. Yes.
MICHAEL: Yep. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So that’s motivation number one. What else?
MICHAEL: So yeah. The analogy at the level of that I coach is being able to take that team competing in the league, right, they’re competing within the group of teams that they’re competing with and they’re doing great, they’re having bits of success here and there and okay, there are going to be some losses because maybe somebody doesn’t step up or something, but that next level is winning the next big tournament, that sort of regional space maybe at the state level, and then can you get it to the state finals. In the business environment for us, we’re still just competing within our league, and very rare you might talk to somebody two, three layers up and they’re asking for help to work with some other initiatives or other teams. And so it’s still kind of in the league. And what we’re hoping for is to be able to expand this in a way that goes up to that say sort of regional or state level to say the people who are recognizing our efforts at those higher levels, our names are on the tip of their tongue.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. So there’s the win, meaning you win the whole thing, right, you’re the champion. Then there’s what we call the best next alternative, which is, hey, we made it to the regional level and state.
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: But we’re known. Right. And what you’re interpreting that internally is like we are a known entity within this organization. Both of those still reflect getting a point on the scoreboard.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s very point driven. It’s very score driven. It’s very like what is the result of playing the game?
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: That is definitely one bucket to get motivated by. Where’s the motivation in everything that happens before you win the scores?
MICHAEL: Yeah. That’s about having those little successes in the process and about going about reaching for that point. Right. So, what are the little things that we’re doing? Again, using the on field analogy, what are the little things that we’re doing every single day that scoring the goal is just natural? It just becomes a natural thing. So, how do we create those processes and those environments such that everybody is just saying to us, you want this kind of learning moment. This is the group you go to. They have everything really well-defined, really well identified and bought out that we can see by engaging with them, by going into their processes, that we’ll have success. We know that. Yeah. There’s another whole story on the athletics field that makes me realize like, oh, had I only said that.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would you have said?
MICHAEL: I would’ve talked more about the process of how to get to that success than versus Hey, our end goal is to win the state.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
MICHAEL: It’s more about the process.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s more about the process. So how does that relate to finding the motivation in what you all are doing right now?
MICHAEL: It’s asking the questions with my team to say, what are those missing pieces right now in the process that will help motivate us, that will help us get to that known space? What is that thing that’s missing in that process right now?
MURIEL WILKINS:
Yeah. What is the thing that’s missing? What are the things that we think might lead to it?
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because if we know that that is generally the direction it’s going to take us in, then we start focusing on not just the outcome, but the process, the effort. And the motivation is in the effort, actually with the hope that it gets us to the outcome, but with no guarantee. And so, I think where you are, Michael, is that as a leader, you’ve sort of held up the big win, okay. The world championship. What is it called in soccer? What is it? Is it World champ?
MICHAEL: The World Cup.
MURIEL WILKINS: The World Cup. You’ve held up the World Cup. I was going to say the Super Bowl, the World Cup. You’ve held up the World Cup. And what I’m asking is like, wait a minute. There’s a lot that needs to happen before you get to the World Cup, right? You don’t go from boys little league or girls little league soccer to the World Cup, both at an individual level and at a team level.
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s a long game. And so how do you find your motivation to stay for that long game? Yeah, you keep your eye on that prize, but what’s the day-to-day motivation? So we’ve sort of expanded the framing of motivation that yes, it needs to happen at the macro level with getting the big win, being at the C-suite, being able to have those conversations at the C-Suite, that’s your World Cup. And in the meantime, we’ve got a ton of matches to play. We’ve got a lot of drills to practice, we’ve got a lot of different things that we need to do, and we have to have the patience and determination to get through it, we have to put in the effort that we hope ultimately will lead to that. So where do we find the motivation to do that? And I think you articulate it very well, we have to celebrate those small wins because they are just as worthy. Now, motivation will get us, but so far, and so if you do all of this and the motivation is not there one day, for one week, for one month, what needs to kick in?
MICHAEL: Yeah. This is one that I’ve always struggled with. You have those ups and downs and you have those days that are like, “Ugh, do I want to get out of bed? Do I want to do this today?” But the interesting part for the team, and I’ve heard it many times from my team like, “I get up because of this team.” And every time I hear that from anybody on the team, wow, that’s motivating, that’s motivating to me, and I don’t know if it’s motivating to everybody else to hear it, so it just makes me think how much more can we keep seeing those little types of things, those little, “I’m so motivated to be here today. I am so glad I got out of bed because I know that I get to be with you all today.” Even the virtual calls, just those little pick-me-ups always help.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think there’s a little bit of managing expectations. Motivation in essence means you are moved to do something, there’s a motive, it’s motive-driven that when you think about what underlies the word motivation, there’s motive, it’s like motive and action. So you move to meet that motive, and as you said, there might be days where you get up and you’re like, “I don’t want to get out of bed. My motive right now is to stay in bed.” I felt like that this morning.
MICHAEL: It was Monday. I know. I have the same thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: I feel like that almost mornings.
MICHAEL: Same thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like, “Oh my gosh.”
MICHAEL: I hit my alarm. I was like, “I need 10 more minutes.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. So I think you can wait for motivation to hit, but when motivation doesn’t hit, here lies the difference. There are those, they wait for motivation to hit, and if motivation doesn’t hit, then they don’t do anything. And there are those who wait for motivation to hit, and if it doesn’t hit, discipline kicks in. And so, what’s the difference between motivation and discipline?
MICHAEL: Well, discipline that you’re doing it every single day, you’re staying on target with whatever that thing is that you’ve set, whether it’s reading something every day or getting on a bike or a treadmill or something of that nature, or practicing the same little move on the field that you do every day. Just doing it over and over, getting into it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why do you do it?
MICHAEL: Because you know that by doing it, you’ll be better at it in the long run.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. So it’s not based on a feeling, it’s not based on whether I like it, it makes me happy or it doesn’t make me happy, it’s feeling irrelevant, it’s agnostic when it comes to feelings. It’s not, “Oh, when it’s sunny out, I’ll go out for a run, but if it’s raining, I’m staying indoors. It’s 6:00 AM, I’m going for a run within reason. If it’s under 20 degree weather, I’m not going anywhere.”
MICHAEL: And that’s one of my things too. For me, there’s discipline in like I have to get on my bike and my rowing machine at least three times a week. I know that that’s not perfect in this sense of discipline, but it’s every other day.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s fine.
MICHAEL: I hit three days.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a cadence to it.
MICHAEL: There’s a cadence.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s not to say that, Hey, you should only have discipline or you should only have motivation. I think why I’m offering this up to you, where we’re getting here, Michael, is that you have more to tap into in terms of sustaining yourself and your team than just motivation. You also have the tool of energizing their discipline. And so the question becomes, what are the practices of discipline that make up your team? What are the things that you all agree you do day in, day out, week in, week out, whether you like it or not? For me, I hate going to the dentist, but you know what? I do it because I hate the consequence of not doing it.
MICHAEL: Yeah. That’s good. Because there are a couple of moments that we practice every week, we have three specific moments, and one of them is this is where we learn, this is where we practice, this is where we challenge each other. There’s one particular day every week for an hour to hour and a half where we challenge and question and ask each other those questions of, what are we doing? Why are we doing it for us? That’s a great discipline, I think. We even tried to teach it to other people, but nobody ever sticks to it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Discipline is hard to stick to.
MICHAEL: It is. I’ve even tried to question the team of, “Look, we have these particular moments, do we need to change any of that? Is it working or is it not working? Is it contributing to how we’re communicating with each other on our work, on our successes and our priorities?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So look, I think that what you’re sharing here is you’ve been trying to pull the motivation lever, and you have room in how to do that, there’s the small wins, there’s this other lever, which is when the motivation is not there, what are we still going to do regardless of how we feel about it? Because we believe that if we do them, it is going to contribute to this end prize that we’re trying to get to, it is going to contribute to us getting to the World Cup. That’s a mindset. And the mindset starts with you as the team lead. Are you creating a culture where the only way that folks will move or be engaged is if they’re motivated 100% of the time all the time? Which I’m all for motivation, but it’s just not realistic, we’re human, there are days we don’t want to get out of bed. Or are you creating a culture where we operate both from a place of motivation and discipline? Both, not one or the other. Please don’t get me wrong. Please don’t think I’m saying, “You know what, just go and be like [inaudible 00:33:17]
MICHAEL: Yeah. No, no, no. Absolutely. It’s inside the language of discipline that allows for the motivation to sort of come out and blossom, I think.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
MICHAEL: What I’m hearing as well as some of the experiences, and ironically enough, we teach a lot about how to understand your work through vision, where are you going in the future? What is that future state? What does that look like and feel like? And we teach it at a very generic level in order to get into the conversation within teams and within projects.
MURIEL WILKINS: But here’s the thing, it is about not resting your laurels on one end or the other. And what I hear you saying is what you tend to use, even if in your work with your internal clients is dangling the future state and saying, “Hey, look at this bright, shiny future state, don’t you want to get there?” And I think what we’re talking about here is there’s this other side of it, which is current state and what actions you can take. And I think the motivation is found somewhere in between. It’s the top down meets bottoms up approach. You find it in real-time between the vision of what can happen and the actions of what are happening. And so this is why, again, going back to your sports experience, I’m a runner, sometimes my motivation doesn’t kick in until I’m like at mile four or five. I’ve been miserable the first couple of miles, but I got up, I did it. That’s the discipline, I’ve kept going. Then I’m like, “Oh, okay.” And then sometimes it doesn’t happen until afterwards, sometimes it never happens, but I got it done. But if you only rely on one, it’ll burn out, it’ll sizzle out at some point. So what’s at your disposal as a leader is knowing that at least, but I’m just trying to prioritize, you have more levers at your disposal than just dangling the big prize, the World Cup in front and saying, hey, because what’s happening is when your people feel like they’re not there or they’re not super close to there, then they lose it. You got to give them something else,
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: We may have run with the World Cup metaphor a bit long here, but the point worked for Michael, so I went with it. Michael is someone well-versed in coaching others, and so he gets the idea of celebrating small wins along the way to the big goal. I get the sense that he knows he should be doing that with his team, and maybe this serves simply as a reminder of what he knows he should have been doing all along. This conversation around motivation and discipline, being different levers at his disposal is an important one, both for himself and for what he projects onto his team. But we also started this conversation in part thinking about not just Michael and his team, but those above him, the managing up piece of this. And it’s important to return to that point with Michael. He in part might be missing some of the clarity with his team because it seems like the leadership above him is also lacking that, especially with all the change going on. We’ve established at this point that it’s up to Michael to determine the mile markers for his team to keep them feeling encouraged. But now we’ll loop back and address the fact that those mile markers haven’t been defined from the top of the organization. And as a result, Michael doesn’t know what his own objectives are.
MICHAEL: That’s their, I guess, part of the crux of that motivation because of all the different leadership changes and all the unknowns and the different changing opinions of some and me saying, “What do you want, what are you expecting,” and trying to get some of those expectations set, and in some cases being quite vague.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So in an ideal state, you would be getting direction and it would not be vague. I would love that for you. If that doesn’t happen, what other choices do you have?
MICHAEL: I think it’s really just continuing to ask. I think it’s saying, “Here’s what we are doing,” and saying, “We intend to deliver through this process, or this is the way we do X, Y, and Z.” And until someone is saying no, until somebody says, “No, you can’t do that,” we’re going to keep doing it because we know there’s impact, because our discipline and our motivation helps us get to that next date.
MURIEL WILKINS:
Okay. So I’m hearing actually two choices that you have there. One is, “I’m asking, I’m not getting a clear response, I’m getting very vague response.” So choice number one is I keep asking. I keep asking and I keep waiting. That’s choice number one. Basically doing what you’re already doing. Choice number two is, “I’m going to keep taking action and I’m going to make some decisions. I don’t know if they’re right, I don’t know if they’re going to land okay, but we’re going to keep forging ahead until somebody tells us not to do that, or somebody tells us to do that until we get more concrete answers.” So that’s choice number two. What other choices are there?
MICHAEL: Boy, this is a tough one because I can’t think of good options within the company other than those two. I’m alluding to something else that I wouldn’t want to go down that road anyways.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is maybe doing something outside of the company.
MICHAEL: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s an option though, right?
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Option is exit.
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s an option. Look, I don’t really… No judgment on your options. I have no skin in this game. I have no like, in my head, I hope he goes with option number X. Right?
MICHAEL: Right, right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m good. Okay.
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: All I want you to realize is that you have options. You have options.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you have options, this is what leads you back to, okay, what’s the purpose? What’s my motivation? What are we trying to do? Which one am I going to follow today? Left without making an explicit decision on which option you’re following, it feels like you’re operating with no direction. And that might be what your team is feeling.
MICHAEL: Yeah. That that’s quite valid because there are, I mean, over this year, there have been a lot of questions of do we do any one of literally those three? Because there was that third option that was floated and I, we’ve played around with what does that mean? But it just doesn’t, it’s not feasible in what we do. And like I say, I’ve been with the company long enough knowing that I want this to be my one company to finish out my real career. With the direction some of this has gone, has been a lot of those positive things and the growth of what my team is, it’s very positive. But yeah, I guess that’s a little bit of an eye-opener to think, “Oh, if without making the choice, that leaves the team with a lot of questions, leaves the team with a lot of, what are we doing?”
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, you’re kind of being, if I may, as vague as the other people are being with you, to your team. So I think what we’re getting to is at some point in the midst of the ambiguity, in the midst of the change, you’ve still got to put a stake in the ground. The difference is that you accept that stake in the ground might not stay there for very long, but at least it’s a stake in the ground for now.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, going back to your original question around how do I keep people motivated? How do I keep myself motivated? I think a part of it is, well, you need to be motivated around something.
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? And it sounds like the big prize of being at the C-suite level and having impact at a scale is a worthy anchor, but it seems a little too far away and a little too nebulous right now. You need something a little closer to home to anchor on. It’s like when I take long drives. I start looking for the little mile markers because my gosh, the next exit… It’s like, next exit is a hundred miles. You’re like, ah!
MICHAEL: Right, right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, let me start looking for the little mile markers. And that makes me feel like I’m getting a little closer. I’m getting a little closer. That’s my anchor. So, you got to give your team an anchor, Michael, and if they can’t articulate it, then you articulate it.
MICHAEL: Just the other day, we did an exercise whereby we were looking at what do we want to see as that future state? And then we went through the exercise of saying, “Okay, what are the things?” Let’s focus in on two or three of those that you feel are the most important. And we had a ton of information. There was just so much that we had collected. One member did say, “Blah, blah, I don’t see sort of the red thread. I don’t see connecting all of this together.” And I said, “Well, can we agree that those three items are the most important items?” And everybody but two said yes, and one of the other two said, “No, we’re not aligned. We don’t understand.” We said, well, okay, what is it? What? What’s missing? What’s not in the alignment?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it sounds like you’re asking the right questions and you’re facilitating the conversation. What I’m not hearing is when are you also using the managerial leadership communication skill of asserting and setting direction?
MICHAEL: I intentionally did not do it because I wanted to give the team an opportunity to help set some of that direction this time. I wanted to say, “There are so many things that we could be doing. What’s everybody thinking?” When the question was asked of, “What is that red thread on this whole thing?” I said, “Well, look, there was like a hundred ideas over here on this side, and you got to these three, you all got to these three, so these are the three that you want to focus on. And I agree with those three, so let’s focus there.” I did leave it to say, look, can we do these three? I did not state these are the three.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
MICHAEL: These are these, this is it.
MURIEL WILKINS: There is one assertion, which could be these are the three. And I understand you saying, hey, I want them to spend more time. But there’s also the other question that you said, the person asked is, what’s the thread? Which is different than do these need to be the three?
MICHAEL: And yeah, that was never asked. It was purely, what’s the thread? It was never-
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MICHAEL: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that’s a different question.
MICHAEL: I do too. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think part of the responsibility of a leader is to be able to pull back and as they say, get on the balcony and pull everything together, frame the collective, create the thread, make sure there’s a thread. Going back to this notion of the mile markers, the little wins. Your team can come up with those. And you’ve also got to make sure that as they are articulating what those things are, whether they’re priorities or activities or practices, whatever you want to call them… It’s your job as the leader to say, “Okay, when we put all these things together, does it make sense?”
MICHAEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why? As your team members stated, what’s the thread that pulls all of this together? So you need to frame the activities.
MICHAEL: Agreed, understood. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think what you’re balancing is continuing to be the facilitative consultative leader that you are, which is what probably makes you a great internal coach. And also exercise the directional framing, context setting capabilities that also are required of a leader.
MICHAEL: But thankfully, my calendar starts to look more like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
MICHAEL: Yeah. It’s definitely taking those blocks of time, being more intentional and saying, I’m going to focus in on creating this red thread. I always forget how it’s said in German, but [German phrase 00:46:18] I think.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, you could say it, and I wouldn’t even know.
MICHAEL: It’s said often to me in my company.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, my Goodness. All right. Very good. So we’ve covered a lot.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you started off with the question of how do you keep people motivated? I think we’ve gone there as well as other places. I’d love to hear what your key takeaways are coming out of this conversation and what feels different for you now versus when we got started.
MICHAEL: So, I think the first one that really stuck out for me was being able to reframe how I’m asking the question about motivation for myself. How am I really thinking about it just for me in terms of not just the work, but it’s all the other things around that, and how do I ask myself and how do I connect that to the discipline of the work every day showing up? Whether it’s the little phrases for the team or the little reminders of the small wins, or the identifying of the markers and being able to highlight and celebrate those all along the journey. I think I’ve written discipline on my notes about four times already.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s discipline.
MICHAEL: Yeah. And then understanding that this… And we talk a lot about mindset… But understanding how the mindset of operating from discipline and operating towards motivation, this top down, bottom up, in the actions and the vision. Being able to remind myself over and over that, keeping that mindset focused on discipline. And finally, it’s that I have to be more clear with my option, be clear with where my options, but also in the direction that I’m setting with which option I’m taking. Even though we have a ton of ideas, these are the three focused areas, and this is the decision we make.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Beautiful. Beautiful. I think I’ll just add one more.
MICHAEL: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: If I may.
MICHAEL: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which I think can be your mantra, because what it reflects is that you have full capacity to be able to do this. And I think the mantra that I would leave you with is to walk the talk.
MICHAEL: Yep. All too true.
MURIEL WILKINS: All too true.
MICHAEL: All too true. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, very good. Thank you so much.
MICHAEL: Yeah. This was really good. Thank you. Because it really helps bring the things that I’ve been very compassionate with others about, but sometimes coaches need coaches too.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes, they do. All right, Michael, thank you.
MICHAEL: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Finding motivation isn’t easy, for yourself or your team, but when you look to those above you for answers, you aren’t always going to get what you’re looking for. This is a lesson MICHAEL is learning in his role, that in the face of ambiguity, you still need to establish some mile markers for yourself and your team to keep things moving. For much of this coaching session, Michael was able to come up with answers to his own questions by just thinking about them in terms of the advice he’d give his own internal customers. Coaching yourself can be as simple as that. Creating space between you and the issue by asking yourself, “What would I suggest to a colleague, a friend, an internal customer, if they faced the same challenges?” And just like Michael, you may find that the solution is right in front of you, and it’s just a matter of walking your talk. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I haven’t been in a situation quite like this where I feel like I actually hold all the cards. I can essentially negotiate for what I want. What do I need to be successful in this role? What do I need to ask for and make sure that I’m getting in terms of support, systems, resources, things like that, to ensure my success?
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of this episode? Join the
Coaching Real Leaders
community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with our leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I More Effectively Build Stakeholder Alignment?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Diego to protect his confidentiality. He’s someone with a background in manufacturing and logistics, and really enjoys the problem solving aspect of his field.
DIEGO: I think that the idea of working with so many variables, because logistics is truly a very multi-variable complex problem. There’s so many things that can go wrong, so many inputs along the way, and I think that ability to diagnose all of them at once and then create a 10,000-foot strategy, logistics was just a fondue of defects to go hound.
MURIEL WILKINS: Diego was an individual contributor for some time and a few years ago he started managing teams, just a couple of team members to start, but that number grew quickly and the new challenge of managing people has been highly motivating for him, but what’s been a bit harder is managing the people around him that he isn’t directly responsible for.
DIEGO: What I think has been the harder part actually is the stakeholder side. Now that I have to coach individuals and not have direct contact to the stakeholders they’re dealing with, that has been, I guess, a longer learning curve. I mean, I think I still have a long way in people management, but I think I’ve been able to make a lot of changes along the way that I’m seen the benefit and the results from that. It’s how I’m able to indirectly coach towards those stakeholder relationships that is taking longer for me to be truly effective in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Diego is an avid learner and has thought a lot about how to adapt his leadership style. I wanted to get more into the specifics around the problem he was facing. So I started by asking him what specifically about stakeholder management is he hoping to improve?
DIEGO: I think for me it’s to understand what are the tool sets we have to influence stakeholders. Tying this a bit to a goal, I’ve been almost surprised and perplexed by, as an IC, you’re measured a lot on your own results, your own ability to be right and act quickly. And as I’ve gone into this role and I look forward to the next level, it seems very much like, and maybe you could validate a bit that my performance now leans a lot on my ability to work with stakeholders and bring results, whereas before it was my own doing. So I see that as a key cog of what are the tool sets I have to work effectively, influence, and sometimes even gauge when I shouldn’t get in the way with stakeholders. That feels like a true director VP skill that is very critical.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, I don’t know the exact responsibilities of your role, but in general, I would say as you ask, validate whether this is true or not. I think in general, the more you’re leading at scale, the higher the level of complexity. And one of the areas of complexity is the number of relationships that you now have to manage and influence. And as you pointed out, some of them being direct relationships, some of them being indirect. So you almost want to think about it as a web. And if you’ve ever seen a spider, what do they do? Do they weave a web? I don’t know. They do something, they create the web, right?
DIEGO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m thinking that’s a
Charlotte’s Web
, but it starts off small and then it gets bigger and bigger and actually more complicated. But there is some order to it,
DIEGO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it sounds like what you’re experiencing is as you’ve moved from getting to results through yourself now having to get results through others and by others, it’s not just your team members, but it’s people who fall outside of your team.
DIEGO: Correct, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so tell me why this is a challenge right now for you.
DIEGO: I think before I saw it very much bifurcated into leadership would come to me with a problem I needed to go solve and it was in my own skill and will to be able to accomplish that. What I’ve noticed is now there will be other projects or initiatives where another team owns them and I find out through updates from my team of where we are in something and my knee-jerk reaction is, we need to course correct or we need to move more quickly, or we’re approaching this in a way that won’t reap the optimal results. And how I’ve encountered those interactions as in always led to aligning in maybe a combined opinion or approach or course correcting. That’s what is my struggle. How can I decide to probe or question or take over or provide direction in more effective ways? That’s what’s really a hurdle in my job today right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Let me just make sure I’m getting the scenario right. So you run into situations, your team shares with you, hey, here’s what’s happening. You’re like, wait a minute, it shouldn’t be happening this way. Or why is this happening this way? We need to fix it, course correct, and we need to do it quickly.
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So your understanding is you need to fix it and it needs to be fixed quickly. And then you go out there to the stakeholders and you’re like-
DIEGO: The second degree stakeholders.
MURIEL WILKINS: To the second degree stakeholders and you’re like, “Hey, hold up. We need to fix this and we need to do it quickly.” And then what happens? What are you you faced with?
DIEGO: So last year I think that the sentiment was I would come in and sometimes I would bulldoze the initiative into a certain way and sometimes the team would go along the stakeholders and the results would be positive, but I would lose trust in the process because of the bulldozing. That then meant in other initiatives, there was a lot of pushback. And so slowly I’ve noticed that my approach, although sometimes would again reach good results, would be encountered with pushback because of that bulldozing, I don’t know what better word there is for that, that forceful direction, if you will. And so since then I’ve been consciously trying to step away from that overpowering direction and I’m trying to figure out what are the other different approaches that can still yield speed, maybe not as fast, but still relatively fast without losing trust and treating everybody like a team. Definitely something that’s very important to me, but it wasn’t coming across that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, it wasn’t coming. So what would it have looked like if it had come across that way?
DIEGO: I think sometimes it can be perceived that I’m not listening and instead I am too focused on this approach and this answer. That’s I think something that I’ve definitely noticed is by changing instead of directing, asking questions and probing, that in itself forces more listening as opposed to more talking. So it’s been attacked, I’ve been focusing on a lot. And then something else is a lot more one-on-ones, right? Especially in a remote or dispersed environment, making sure you spend the time to not only in bigger forums, but in one-on-ones individually, create a relationship and understand where each individual is regardless of the level. Those are two things I’ve been implementing a lot more and they’re helping. So I think what I’m trying to get out of this and other mentorships is what are other things I should focus on to expedite my ability to do this better?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is what’s interesting to me. So what you’re saying is, okay, if I listen, right, if I listen and I ask questions and I focus on the possibilities rather than being tied to my way of doing it, so I engage other possibilities, other solutions, and I have one-on-ones with these critical stakeholders, then I seem to be able to influence them?
DIEGO: Correct, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: It just takes too long.
DIEGO: That’s a great summary, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And when you say it takes too long, what’s the hurry?
DIEGO: What is the hurry? Everything should be fixed yesterday. I think that’s the hurry. There’s so many problems. It’s a Santa laundry list. So there’s always a focus on fixing all these defects for customers, for operators, for suppliers. So there’s always an eagerness to move very quickly. It’s that startup energy no matter how big the company is. So I think it’s almost a self in post speed, but that is the situation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. That is the situation, right? I mean, I don’t even know what to say you said, and I think in all seriousness, I think the question is you’re sharing that everything needs to be solved yesterday, but according to whom?
DIEGO: Yeah, that’s a good question.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, look, every morning on school days when I wake up, I am ready to get my kids to school quickly. One of my kids has a different agenda. We both agree school is happening and that’s where we’re going. The difference is our conception or perception, I should say, of how quickly that needs to happen. And what do you think ends up happening as a result?
DIEGO: There’s a dispute of how to go about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I feel like it’s a dispute.
DIEGO: Yeah, there you go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
DIEGO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Depends how the person responds, right? So, my stakeholder, my kid, right? Respond by just being like, “Why are you getting so stressed out? We’re good.” I don’t need to be there on time. So that’s one response, another response could be pushback. There are a number of different responses, but the point here is there’s misalignment around timing. And so the level of urgency that you have is not a shared level of urgency. So I know you’re looking for tactics, but I think what you have framed before around, hey, when I listen, when I do what works in terms of influence, and you name them, I think what’s not working is the timing that you have against that, which is the urgency level. You see it as urgent. How do you determine what’s urgent and what’s not urgent?
DIEGO: Some shape of entitlements, I guess meaning some metric we can impact. Or sometimes metrics can hide that even if something doesn’t happen as frequently, when it does happen, it’s catastrophic if you will. So weighing those two things from all the problems we have, which ones have the highest impact or can be the most catastrophic. And honestly, number two with that is only enforcing speed. When I perceive feasibility, I know there’s an actual solve we can do within the timeframe that may be a self-imposed to me, that’s how I deem something urgent. If it’s extremely critical from an impact perspective, but it’s not feasible, it’s important then not urgent using Eisenhower’s matrix. That’s how I’ve traditionally approached that. It’s feasibility and level of impact to a metric or an anecdote.
MURIEL WILKINS: Level of impact. You’re defining impact as the results, the level of impact it has on the final metric, on the final performance?
DIEGO: Correct. Say like meeting deliveries on time to say that if we can make a dent to improving that, to having more deliveries on time, then that would be the level of impact.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then the other feasibility is can we do it within this amount of time?
DIEGO: Correct. And there becomes the great discussion of scrappily or scalably.
MURIEL WILKINS: Diego has been drawn to his roles in part because of his love of problem solving, of finding ways to do things more efficiently and effectively. What he’s running into is the fact that that kind of efficiency doesn’t always apply to all situations. He’s recognized where trying to push things forward without buy-in has held him back in the past and is looking for better ways to build that buy-in, especially with people that he can’t give directives to. Next, I think it’s worth taking the time to better understand more about the interactions and relationships he has at work and how his words and actions might adjust to get the results he wants. Let’s jump back in. When you talk to your stakeholders about impact, do they speak the same language in terms of impact? Do they see the same potential catastrophe that you see?
DIEGO: Not always. As many other companies, very metricized organization, which sometimes, although we want to try to take into account all of the customer impacts, all the operator impacts from all over the project, sometimes some teams focus on the responsibility rightfully so. And so it’s sometimes hard to gauge, say, my team’s impact with this.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you tee that up to them, you’re not going to get into specifics. But how do you tee up the impact? How do you make it make sense to them?
DIEGO: I don’t spend enough time sometimes there trying to run to the root cost there. Sometimes say I’ll also bring a metric, but sometimes the metric is just a metric if they don’t know the experience that my operator’s undergoing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Or how it’s going to impact them.
DIEGO: Correct. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think there’s a bit around are you framing the impact in a way that’s going to resonate with them? Going back to the example, the personal example I gave, if I tell my child, hey, we’ve got to hurry up and get to school because I have a meeting to go to, I mean, what do you think my kid’s reaction is?
DIEGO: They’re not going to care.
MURIEL WILKINS: And? So what? I guess you’ll have to figure that out.
DIEGO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, a big part of being able to influence is how you frame your message and the framing has to be in a way that is relevant to the person that you’re trying or the group that you’re trying to influence. And so, my question would be, have you thought about how do you define the quote-unquote “impact” in a way that actually they can feel right because impact is something that they’re going to feel, or even though you might be seeing it as a potential catastrophe or risk, do they see it as a potential catastrophe or risk? And if not, then what is the risk to them?
DIEGO: That’s a good question. I’m reading right now, what is it? A book that talks about the elephant and the rider, so influencing through the logical and the emotional side. So haven’t quite gone through it, but it’s great to hear that you’re talking about that it’s not just about the logic or the metric. How do you make them feel the importance and understand your impact on your side beyond just a metric That makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. I mean, it sounds to me like what’s happening is you’re going to them and saying, “Hey, we’ve got these measures that we need to be able to meet – my team, Diego’s team has to be able to meet – and because you’re not course correcting, it’s going to hurt us.”
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And while that’s true, I don’t know if that’s giving the effect of the message that you want, which is that you want them to move, which means that you have to find out how to make it important to them. Meaning how does it impact their metrics? How does it impact whatever it is that they’re working on? And frame it from that perspective.
DIEGO: Almost create that attribution between their world and my world in some shape or form.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. And if you don’t know what that is, what do you think you can do?
DIEGO: I think at that point, what I would do today is schedule some brainstorming session to understand how our processes are linked or not linked, and try to figure out that connection. Because if they’re not linked, then there’s a bigger problem at hand, I would say. But traditionally it’s been more they are linked, we just haven’t assessed in what shape or form. So that would be my first gut feel is to meet and dive deeper into the situation before we step back.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so here’s the piece, here’s the difference between leading the situation that you’re in and managing the situation that you’re in. Managing the situation is something’s gone wrong and now we’ve got to figure out where the intersections are.
DIEGO: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Leading it is before anything goes wrong, you’re taking the time to sit down with your stakeholders and figuring out how do you define success? Here’s how we define success, where are the intersections and here are the potential risks that might come down the pike. How do we want to deal with them? And so you are creating or making explicit the interdependencies between you and your stakeholders, rather than wait till it’s very clear that there’s independence and you’re then trying to create the interdependence.
DIEGO: I like the way you framed it as well there.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is it that you like about that?
DIEGO: Often to your point, we wait for a misalignment. I don’t even want to call it a problem. Something doesn’t really need to break, but we wait for that misalignment to happen to then react. And at that point, the self and post speed means there’s no time. I think by you framing that, maybe even before the project truly starts, or as it’s starting, that’s when you actually make the time. And that’s usually when you actually have the time to do this. So I think it’s alluding more to the, am I being proactive enough about aligning and sharing everybody’s top priorities, impacts all those things and how they’re connected and then going to solve the problem. Sounds like that will ease and expedite problem solving when it arises.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
DIEGO: That makes a lot of sense. Yeah. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I love that you said it’s about being proactive. That’s exactly what it is. I’ve been a little obsessed with, I don’t know if you know Dr. Peter Attia, I think that’s how you pronounce his last name. Anyway, he’s a doctor. He’s just written a pretty fantastic book. I don’t know if it was just written, but a book called Outlived, and it’s about basically increasing your health span rather than your lifespan. And he talks about how medicine is very reactionary. You wait till the disease pops up and then you treat the disease versus being preventative, which is let’s prevent the disease and even more so not even preventative, being proactive, let’s figure out what are the things that are occurring in your body right now that show a high probability or enough of a probability that if it’s not dealt with now, it will end up at that course correction point, which is what you’re facing.
DIEGO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So we don’t want to wait until the disease pops up because guess what? When the disease pops up, it’s actually been in the making.
DIEGO: For some time.
MURIEL WILKINS: For some time. So those situations that you’re facing where you’re like, “Oh my God, it needs to be fixed yesterday.” The reason why you’re feeling the urgency is because you didn’t do the work earlier on in a proactive way to say, well, what could pop up and how do we deal with it now? So that’s the alignment around the impact piece, which is the first variable that you talked about, being proactive around that. The second piece is the urgency and the fact that you are operating with, it needs to be done yesterday, it needs to be fixed yesterday, and that part of that is based on feasibility. So if I understand what you’re saying is if it’s possible to fix it, then we should do it right away.
DIEGO: Then there’s my expectation that we should be doing it right away. Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. And where does that expectation come from?
DIEGO: I guess just years in the making of the ability to put it together extremely quickly on my own then is now we should be able to do that. With my team, that’s the fun part because that’s how I get to develop my team and that’s what I truly love doing. I then get to recognize where do we need to go fast and then teach after we launch something and other instances where I say, no, we can actually forego speed for the development play here, but it’s all within my scope, so I get to control it or take accountability for speed or quality, so on, and so forth. When it’s external stakeholders, tough is I believe I can do it. I believe maybe even my team can do it, but the responsibility to do it lies outside of my purview. So that’s what makes it tough, that feasibility, knowing we can, but it’s hard to enforce or make it happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, I’m sitting here thinking like, huh, what are all the things that I think are feasible but yet not happening?
DIEGO: It’s a lot. I bet too.
MURIEL WILKINS: And is it because something is feasible that it should happen? So is it that if I just take your rule or your mantra that, hey, if I can do it, then A, everybody else should be able to, we can do it and we should do it because it’s possible and we should do it quickly. If I take that, then I would have my whole company running marathons.
DIEGO: Correct, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Even those that have never run, but I’m like, but you could do it, so we should do it as a rule. So how is that rule working out for you?
DIEGO: Well, it wasn’t working out effectively last year, I would say. And so now I stop myself and I ask myself, is this one of five things? Is this something I should not interfere regardless of feasibility? Is it something I need to probe and just question to see if they arrive at the same conclusion? Is it something I need to direct as opposed to question, just tell them what needs to be done and how to do it. Is it something I need to take over and do it myself? That has been, I probably want to say the last three to four months, what I’ve been really focusing on is no, the expectation of everybody running a marathon, it’s not a scalable, a healthy or a good expectation. It’s figuring out when to pick the battle. And then the next step of that is how to then approach the battle in one of those four or five ways that I’ve been focusing on because to your point, it wasn’t working.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Okay. And I love that you have a framework for yourself and a checklist because that in essence is you coaching yourself through those different scenarios. I still think there’s a bit around the urgency, how fast something needs to be done. You could, it sounds like that’s what you were doing is approaching everything as the firefighter who leaves the station. It doesn’t matter what call they get, they leave and it’s like the siren is going… They’re going fast.
DIEGO: Go put the fire out.
MURIEL WILKINS: Regardless of whether it’s the cat up in the tree or a real disastrous apartment building that’s in full blaze. But once they get there, they make an assessment of, oh, how urgent is this truly? And what do you think they make that assessment based on?
DIEGO: Like you said, how many individuals are at risk from a life perspective. So it’s I think tying back to those metrics, but then refining that really well to just, what is that one thing? If there’s individuals at risk, that’s assuming the one thing they look at, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. So urgency for the sake of urgency is, I mean, I don’t know, I don’t know what that is unless that’s the definition of your role, unless you’re a sprinter or a race car driver or anything where literally the key to their success is going fast.
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: And everything that you’ve articulated, it doesn’t sound like it’s that. It sounds like it’s more a matter of what’s showing up is urgency on your end, but what seems to be underlying it is what is the level of risk?
DIEGO: Correct. Yeah, I think it’s an intensity thing. I’m the kind of individual that every time I go run, I always run at the best speed. I just ran last time to try to improve upon. A previous manager told me, some things are built in your DNA, just don’t let them be a problem. So maybe my urgency and intensity are just in me, but I need to assess that life-threatening piece more adamantly so that my intensity doesn’t become a problem, which it was before, and I’m trying to, I guess, dissipate that problem.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, and look, I mean, I think I’m going to just tweak a little bit about is it part of your DNA, I think it’s something that has served you well. It’s something that has led to a lot of your successes in your career, particularly as an individual contributor when you were one, which you’re not anymore, and it has served you well in running because you said you’re a runner in your, I don’t know quite how old you are, but I can see from talking to you, you’re probably a few decades younger than I am. It has served you well in the stage of running of your life that you’re in now. And so I think you are holding on to something that has served you well up until now, and now it’s okay. I know I can do that, but what other approaches will help me be a more well-rounded runner into the future, a more well-rounded leader as you scale. And so if we use this metaphor, it sounds like you’re a sprinter, you run with a lot of intensity, right? The research shows you also need to be able to do endurance. You need to be able to have the easy days. You need to be able to, as they say, slow down to get faster. And the same goes with leadership. There’s intensity and then there’s times where you have to slow down to get to the results to make the overall better. And I think that’s what you’re experiencing is how do you slow down when it comes to being able to get to deliver results,
DIEGO: Correct, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s everything you said, listening, asking the questions, et cetera. So if part of it then is picking your battles, how are you going through that part of the process of deciding when you take the intense urgent route versus deciding if you take the slower, less intense, more unfolding, more collaborative route?
DIEGO: Before it was my gut feeling, I think now I meet with leaders above my level, spread out across the organization to gauge how they see a situation, if we’re making enough progress, and sometimes I outright ask, do they believe more teams need to get involved like myself to expedite support? So as opposed to leaning on my gut, which meant a lot more things needed to be with that urgency, I try to lean on leaders meeting in a lot of one-on-ones with them, and then I consolidate and I stack rank against if multiple leaders mentioned the same thing or area, then that is the highest urgency. I think what that’s also cost is a top down. Hey, DIEGO’s going to come talk to you. So they’ll tell their teams, hey, maybe we could be doing this faster. DIEGO can come and help you. That has been helpful.
So it doesn’t feel like it’s, again, me bulldozing, no, this is, Hey, be a team effort. You’re getting support. It’s a positive thing that myself or my team are coming to help. So that’s how I’m picking my battles nowadays is seeking leadership direction
MURIEL WILKINS: And how’s that working for you?
DIEGO: Much better.
MURIEL WILKINS: Much better?
DIEGO: Significantly better, yeah. It’s also helping me understand those leaders and how they’re prioritizing, right? I think my goal, a little bit of an output from this is what they say, the proactive and the field approach. My goal is for me to be able to diagnose proactively more accurately, here’s the only things I need to have urgency, and bringing that to those leaders and being on point there, that would be I think, a key outcome. And now if they come and tell me, hey, no, there’s another one, then maybe I correct it too far. So I think that’s what I’m trying to gauge.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. What’s interesting to me, Diego, is we started the conversation with you saying, hey, I want to figure out how to manage my stakeholders more effectively. And I agreed. I was like, yeah, stakeholder management. That’s what this conversation’s about. As you are sharing what you’ve tested out and trying to see whether it’s working or not, and you’re saying, yeah, it is working. What’s coming up for me and reflecting back what you’re doing is that there’s a difference between managing your stakeholders and engaging your stakeholders.
DIEGO: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think what you have just shared is what happens when you actually take a stakeholder engagement approach, you engage those individuals in the problem solving rather than manage them to a particular direction. So it’s almost like I would offer to you to think about things in three different ways. One is it’s a self-driven approach, meaning you decide and you just do it right, which sounds like what you were doing earlier on.
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then there’s a stakeholder management approach, which is you decide, you know what needs to be done and you try to get people there, you manage them, put them in a certain place, talk to the right people to make it happen. And then there’s a stakeholder engagement approach, which is, it is more of a collaborative figuring out of what the impact is, how you define success, what do we think is urgent versus not urgent? What are the interdependencies?
DIEGO: I think that makes a lot of sense with the engagement piece because it goes back to the little things I’ve been doing of listening, asking questions in one-on-one is figuring out how to double down on that. I think if I do engage more and do it more proactively, I think my propensity to have to do your first two of self-driven or stakeholder management should reduce. I think that would be the goal, which means that that is only the true firefighting as opposed to everything being firefighting. So that model makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so try it out, experiment with it. I do think that stakeholder engagement is generative, meaning if you can do it enough times, it creates its own momentum so that when you do need to come in with the like, “Hey, we need to move on this, and it needed to be done yesterday,” you’ve built enough equity that people based on your track record may attach to it.
DIEGO: Go along with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Go along with it, right?
DIEGO: Yeah. You can spend a couple of trust bucks on it because they understand where you’re coming from. Yeah, makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Versus being all the time there’s a fire, there’s a fire, right? You don’t want to be… There’s so many stories about that us growing up, right?
DIEGO: Yeah, I was going to say, yeah, I’m just crying wolf all the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Crying wolf all the time. You don’t want to be that.
DIEGO: Definitely not.
MURIEL WILKINS: You don’t want to be that, you want to see that there’s a real wolf and make sure that it’s real, not just real for you, but real for others too. And that’s the part around how do you frame it up in a way that makes sense for others.
DIEGO: With the feel, the engagement, and the proactive aspects, I think what I’m really taking out of this is, to your point, the number of times I’m going to have to spend those trust bucks or have to yell wolf is when there’s really a wolf there that must be addressed, which means also I’ll be able to spend more time in more other things. So it’ll have a ripple effect for sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in the coaching conversation, I might typically start transitioning into looking at practical steps or actions that the leader might want to take going forward. But in some ways, Diego is already doing what he needs to do. He’s seeing behavior that doesn’t work well, and he’s adapting to different modes of working with leaders and as a leader. So, I wanted to go back to some of the internal reflection that Diego began the conversation with around his intensity and his passion, because as he tries out new approaches to gain stakeholder buy-in, it’s also important that he remembers his authentic values, what drives him and where his value add is. Let’s dive back in as we work through some of his internal motivations and how they might present differently going forward. My question for you is, you mentioned that you innately feel this intensity, that it’s part of what brings the excitement and the going for it, the attitude that you bring to it. So, my question is how do you manage that for yourself, that intensity, that high level of intensity while doing all the things that we just talked about, which is 80% of the time, let’s just say you’re slowing down externally with the stakeholders.
DIEGO: I don’t think I’ve found that solution yet of how to manage my own intensity. I try to read a lot of different articles. There was recently an article in Harvard Business Review about the no pay, no gain, give it 110%, that’s the old mentality. The new mentality should be, hey, how can you do your best work? It’s when you’re giving it 85% effort. Reading the article, I was like, I don’t do that, I just put my intensity elsewhere. Whether it be at work or even outside of work. I run more, I do all these things. So managing the intensity is something I haven’t figured out. To be really honest. It just goes elsewhere. It’s a little bit of just water on a pipe that just finds a way to go elsewhere.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And listen, I appreciate that honesty and I appreciate the awareness around it. I think it’s important, particularly as you grow as a leader, that there is congruency between what’s happening externally. Meaning if externally you’re saying to your team, hey, we need to, and I’m just saying for simplicity’ sake, we need to slow down. We’re going to take this in a less intense way. If you’re saying those things and acting that way externally, but internally there’s still this high level of energy intensity. Oh, it’s going to show up in some way and it doesn’t serve you well or it’s not going to serve the stakeholders well, something’s going to break at some point. So this is not about getting rid of your intensity. I think it’s how do you make sure that the level of intensity that’s required of you externally is aligned with the level of intensity that you feel internally for that particular situation.
DIEGO: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think this is a little different than you just need to not be in touch.
DIEGO: So, I need to seek to understand what is the… sometimes I also label it passion, I guess. What is the level of passion that’s needed for me from this individual in this situation? And then knowing how to communicate it and orchestrate it to meet that need in that situation.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s interesting to me that you use the word passion though. What’s your definition of passion?
DIEGO: Yeah. I guess that is rather ambiguous. I think I work best in greenfield environments as opposed to more established, more mature environments because there’s so much to fix. And so if I find a greenfield area that I am excited about, I will want to go and work on all of it and fix all of it and make an exciting vision strategy that I know we can come to fruition in five to 10 years, and then that means in the next five to 10 years, it’s just going to be chipping away constantly at making that happen. That brings me a lot of energy and excitement, and it comes across as the let’s go, but all the time. So I think the passion is in fixing something I really believe in and being very excited about it all the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: So the question really for you becomes, can you be passionate about something, and believe in something, and be excited about something, and not feel a high level of intensity towards it? Which if you didn’t feel intensity, let’s come up with another word. When you’re not intense, try to imagine that one time, Diego, when you don’t have that intensity, how would you describe it? What’s the adjective?
DIEGO: The first thing that came to mind honestly would be bored.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
DIEGO: If I am not excited or I’m not intense, it’s because I’m bored with the idea of it or how it’s being approached. So it is very much a zero to a hundred and nothing in the middle. So, yeah, bored would be the easiest way word to come up.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so we don’t want you to be bored, although sometimes being, I mean, I don’t know what does it mean to be bored sometimes? Maybe it makes things clearer, right?
DIEGO: Correct. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would be the alternative to feeling intense around it?
DIEGO: I think that to your point in some of the best moments with a bigger scope in which you really shouldn’t be intense about everything, which I think is what you’re trying to chip away at here, is when you just pause and try to collect yourself and understand the situation, listen to stakeholders, that cool, calm and collected approach, lets me do two things, understand the collective path forward and how to empower people to make it happen. So I have noticed that when my intensity is too high, it doesn’t let me do that well. And I think now, for example, at the next level, the director level, when you’re managing hundreds of individuals in a very big scope that’s needed, and your intensity should only be one or two things at most at one time with such a big scope because you need to be cool, calm, and collected to know how to empower the hundreds of people that are working to make those things happen. So I think that would be the opposite of intensity, I guess, is when I’m not there, I need to be cool, calm and collected, but with the purpose of empowering people. Whereas intensity usually comes with, I still own some ownership of something.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So it’s at a hundred.
DIEGO: Correct. And that means if my team or myself owns something, intensity starts creeping in.
MURIEL WILKINS: So when it’s all on you, you’re at 100 with intensity.
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then there’s this thing of, if I’m not intense, if I’m not at a hundred intense, then I’m bored, and it might mean that I’m not passionate about it, and it’s not even like what are we doing, right?
DIEGO: Yeah. And I think what you just said maybe, or I don’t own it, which maybe at that point, bored isn’t the right word, like you were saying, but there’s just something different of if I own a percentage or cut of something, intensity is there. If I don’t, I’m not excited about the problem statement, then that is when I’m not intense.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, here’s the thing, right? The more you lead and the more you lead at scale, the less you own.
DIEGO: Yeah. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? I mean, in a different way. And so part of it is as you grow as a leader, you are going to have to figure out how to be comfortable with not owning everything and still retain the level of passion and excitement and energy that you bring.
DIEGO: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the formula that you’re using, it just doesn’t carry, it doesn’t carry over. And I’m going to backtrack a little bit on what I said. Like I said, “Oh, what’s the opposite of intensity?” And I think as you’re talking, what might be more useful for you is think about levels of intensity, almost like a scale. I don’t know if you play any instruments.
DIEGO: Yeah. I play the trombone.
MURIEL WILKINS: You play the trombone? Oh my gosh, I’m acting like I know a bunch of things about the trombone. I don’t, but my son plays at saxophone, so it’s same little family, but they’re scales and I hear him playing scales all the time. And I’m sure when you practice you have to practice playing scales. Scales are different notes. There are different scales to your intensity. It doesn’t always have to be on a hundred. And what it sounds like is the level at which it needs to be is not only determined based on your level of ownership, it’s also determined on the others and the level of risk and that beautiful criteria approach that you outlined earlier in the conversation. And so part of what I would encourage you or offer you to do is to start thinking about what are the different scales of intensity?
What are the different level rather than getting rid of it, where are you and what’s necessary for this particular situation? Because if you do it that way, you’re still playing music, the excitement is still there. So let’s just keep that as the theme. The excitement is still there. There’s still a level of engagement. It does not mean that the engagement goes away on your end or the passion goes away, it’s just how does it get expressed? And that expression depends on the scale. How does that land with you when I offer it in that way?
DIEGO: No, the scales of intensity is something I hadn’t thought about. That’s honestly why I wanted to come and talk to you, because I think it took me too long to realize this approach that you said I mentioned earlier. And so what I wanted to get out of today was what are other things I need to keep in mind? I think the scales of intensity is something I hadn’t thought about. Becoming disattached with owning is something that I think as a people manager, it’s when you get your truly first taste of needing to do that, but it’s within your team still. So there’s some attachment still there. So the level of intensity with the attachment, knowing how to do that I think is what I really need to focus on. And if I do that now with the proactive approach that you mentioned earlier, it means now I have multiple concepts I get to use as I go through that. So that makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Beautiful. Beautiful. And look, detaching does not mean you don’t care.
DIEGO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s not make attachment and holding onto it and owning it and having to choke hold it till the end equate this shows that I care about the results. That is not it. All right? I think what you’re understanding through this and what your approach is giving you is actually if I give it room to breathe, if I give it a little more space through time, and I take the time to have those one-on-ones and the listening and all that, that actually also shows that I’m engaged and I care. It’s just a different level of on the intensity.
DIEGO: Yeah. No, that makes too much sense. And sometimes you don’t have that framework, and now that you put it this way, I usually use post-it notes as I’m trying to work on something, I’ll try to figure out what are my scales of intensity, look at a situation and look at my post and I’ll be like, I’m going to use this one. And then usually what I honestly do is a little bit like biohacking. I will write down how it’s been going week over week and see and adjust that barometer. So I’m almost very excited about trying this out.
MURIEL WILKINS: I love it.
DIEGO: In real time in some meetings.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, great. So I think we can wrap up and you’ve already laid out an action plan. I love it.
DIEGO: A 100%, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS:
Although you said, I’m almost excited. What would get you really excited about trying this?
DIEGO: Mastering it. I think that’s just again, the urgency and the expectation person, but I’ll work on that. But I’m excited about the proactive focusing on the field, this level of intensity piece. Definitely the next tool sets I think I needed on my end. And maybe to your point, they weren’t tactical things, but there were things of how can I be a better leader on a day-to-day basis? Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely. No, thank you. And when you get those post-it notes up, take a picture and send it over to me. I’d love to see what it looks like.
DIEGO: Definitely will, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Diego is someone who, like many high achievers, is committed to learning as much as he can and advancing his career. I think the point of the conversation that stuck out most to me was this, the idea that you can’t always sprint or always be at the highest intensity, no matter how much you want to grow and achieve. Sometimes it’s about taking that step back or slowing down. In this case, it’s about realizing that you can’t just push everyone else into being on your timeline or having the same goals as you. And only by slowing down is Diego going to be able to understand what stakeholders really want and to better position his needs as aligned with their needs. He can keep that intensity and stay true to himself in the situations where he needs it, but also learn to adapt to really help him move forward and have a bigger impact at his organization. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time:
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I feel like I’ve got to this point, and it’s not the thing, but there’s part of me that says, “Well, you can’t just keep pivoting every two seconds until you find the thing, you need to settle in and make a living and rise up through the ranks and continue getting promoted.” And so I think what I’m really finding myself in is this spiral of uncertainty of where do I go next? What is the next step?
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions, become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me in my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcast. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Define My New Role to Set Myself Up for Success?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months. But on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone will call Jules to protect her confidentiality. She works in a cross-functional operations role, and has led a number of teams. She didn’t start out in this industry, but she transitioned into it when she made the leap of taking a role that was hugely confidential. She went through the interview process not really knowing what she’d be working on.
JULES: I found my way into this industry by accepting a job, a very secret job. They wouldn’t tell me what it was. But I thought it was exciting, took the job, and then that actually began my management career. So I was given the opportunity to start managing a team and really absolutely loved it. And I really invested a lot in growing my leadership skills. And since then, I’ve really built my identity and my brand around my ability to grow teams, to grow individuals, to make the teams gel really well together, feeling a sense of trust in community, as well as feeling like they have a sense of purpose by connecting their work to the bigger picture.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jules developed a knack for leadership and, in particular, a reputation for leading and growing teams. It’s something she became quite experienced in and passionate about since she took that first job, and has built her career around it. But times change and companies shift. And as a result, she finds herself in a transition moment.
JULES: Our whole department moved to another part of the company, and then my team is currently potentially shrinking. My role is shrinking. However, the leadership has come to me and said, “We recognize you’re an amazing leader. We want to utilize you more. What do you want to do?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Jules has been given what to many people would be the opportunity of a lifetime, to build her dream role from scratch. She’s proven herself as a leader. But in the midst of a lot of changes at the company, she’s looking for a bit of guidance as to where to even begin defining her new role. So there’s clearly a great opportunity for her here. But I start by asking her why she’s also viewing this as a challenge.
JULES: I haven’t been in a situation quite like this where I feel like I actually hold all the cards. I can essentially negotiate for what I want, within reason. There’s budgets and all those things. But I can essentially ask for almost anything and potentially have it. What do I need to be successful in this role? What do I need to ask for and make sure that I’m getting in terms of support systems, resources, things like that, to ensure my success? Because again, I’ve usually been popped into situations where they’re like, “Here’s what you’ve got, work with what you have.” And in this situation, they really, really need me. So I have an opportunity here. How do I write my role to make sure I’m setting up the right boundaries for myself, that I’m not overextending myself in the future? Because I have limited time and energy. I don’t want to be working all hours of the day and night. So how do I make sure I pre-set up those boundaries? And then how do I make sure I ask for the resources that I need to be successful in this role, to have this role be a sustainable role for me and for my team?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You mentioned that you haven’t been in a situation before where you’ve held all the cards. How comfortable are you with that?
JULES: I like it. I can’t say it’s not a fun place to be. It’s a little intimidating because I worry that I won’t ask for enough, right? I will not ask for the moon when I really should be, to making sure that I’m successful. I guess that’s my concern is I haven’t been in this position. I haven’t been at this level before too, so this is also kind of a new operating space for me or operating level, and so I just want to make sure that, it’s like you don’t know what you don’t know kind of thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So what would keep you from asking for enough? What would keep you from asking for the moon?
JULES: I think mostly not knowing what this role requires. And as I’m saying that, I’m wondering why don’t I ask the leaders who are trying to put me in this role, what it requires? But I’m actually not sure that they know either, because also they made this mess.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, it’s a place to start, right?
JULES: That’s true. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Rather than assume that they don’t know. I mean, let me ask you this. How could you find out more or make a better assessment of what the role requires?
JULES: My go-to with these situations is always to kind of fall back to my Bible, which is the first 90 days book, in which basically you do a learning tour. You go around and you ask the same question to people who are boots on the ground. You ask it of people who are higher up. And you try to see if there’s alignment of the information that you’re getting and try to understand the problem space really well. That is generally my go-to strategy and something I would like to do. However, I think in this situation it’s a little different, because I haven’t officially made this role yet, or I haven’t been officially put in this role yet. So I can’t go talk to those people yet, otherwise they’ll be like, “Who are you and why are you talking to me?” And so my ability to gain all this information is a little limited before I jump into it. I may have to actually jump before I can have all that information.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So it’s so interesting to me because this feels very familiar to how you actually joined this company under different circumstances. I mean, you shared with me how… I literally did not know this is where we were going to get to, but you have experience in taking a job and not knowing the details of it, and yet jumping in. And so what made you comfortable doing that the first time around?
JULES: Yeah, that’s a really interesting parallel. And I think at the time, what made me comfortable taking that leap was the people. The hiring manager, I really liked. The people were really humble, and wanted to collaborate and build something great together. The shared sense of purpose was definitely there. And then the company, of course, was again, really highly regarded. So I had a good feeling about it. My instincts were saying, “Yeah, this is a good idea. You should go for it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What are your instincts saying now?
JULES: They are saying something very similar. I would say, yeah, actually this is probably really a case of the heart versus the brain where my heart is like, “This sounds like a really exciting opportunity. You could totally do this. You’d be great at it.” And then my head’s like, “Whoa, whoa, whoa. You don’t know this space very well. You don’t have the expertise that those people do, and you’re not sure you have the resources to get it done. And you’re also promising a lot in a very short amount of time.” So it’s a little bit of that conflict, I guess.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I don’t even know if it’s your head and your heart that are saying two different things or your brain or your heart. I think it’s just two parts of you that are giving you different perspectives. There’s the one that’s saying, “Go, go, go. This is great. This is exciting. We love doing exciting things. We love doing new things. We love transforming organizations.” And then there’s the other one that’s to a certain extent protecting you or trying to protect you, to say, “But wait a minute now, are you sure you want to do this? It might be messy.” And so it’s not about listening to one versus the other. It’s actually about listening to both. The one that is telling you, “Hey, be careful. What are we doing here?” You’ve got to address the questions that it’s asking, in order to make you feel comfortable either moving forward or not moving forward. Knowing what to ask versus not asking. Okay? So as you called it, the brain part or what I’ll call the protecting part of you, what is it that it’s queuing up as red flags?
JULES: I think two really big ones come to mind. One is what I already mentioned, which is limited time and energy. Especially since the pandemic, and I think this is true of a lot of people, I’m very protective now of my time and energy, because burnout is just knocking at the door it seems all the time. And obviously, I want to sustain my career long term. I don’t want to burn out. And then the other piece I think is one that has plagued me pretty much my entire career, which is this idea that I’m not technical enough. However, I’ve led those types of teams ever since I became a manager. And I’ve always got some person or someone questioning my ability, because I don’t have the same kind of background as the people that I lead. And so that has been an insecurity that I have carried with me and tried to deal with over the years. And I think I’m getting a lot better at it by recognizing the value that I do bring. However, that is just a constantly nagging voice where I’m now going into this new situation where this new team is a completely different function than I’ve ever managed. I do not have their expertise. I don’t have their background. I’ve done a little bit of what they do just by the nature of what my job has required over the years. But again, I don’t have the formal training that they do. So there’s that piece that’s kind of nagging me that I’m trying to manage with my usual, trying to recognize what do I bring. But I’d say those are probably the two big things that are holding me back and causing me to really pause. I’m trying to think about this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, got you. So kudos to you for recognizing what’s holding you back. Because when you can recognize what’s holding you back, then you can address it. It’s no different than, “What’s keeping me from going on a drive? I don’t have gas in my car. Okay. Well, now I know.” Versus, “I don’t know what’s keeping me from going for a drive. Could be I don’t have a car.” Okay, well now you have to get a car. So extremely important to laser in on what you believe the blockers might be. Because if not, it just feels like there’s just a myriad of blockers, like the whole world is blocking you. It’s just blocking. But in reality, what you’ve been able to focus on is here are the two big ones, the ones who take up the most space in my head, in my heart, who are standing in the way. So now we just have to figure out how do you address them so that they don’t take up as much space?
JULES: When you phrase it that way, it makes a lot of sense. Because when you’re saying it feels like everything is in the way, I think that’s kind of where it goes, where you’ve got these looming things, but then you start spiraling. And it’s like all the other little negative things that are holding you back are also starting to echo in your head. So I think that’s a really interesting visual that popped into my head when you said that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so we’re just going where the money is. Let’s go where the money is. I remember I had a finance professor when I was in business school, and he was like, “When you want to turn around a company, you got to act like you’re a bank robber.” And we were like, “What?” “You got to go where the money is at the bank.” And so, at a company, you got to find what the biggest problem is if you really want to turn it around. Same with individuals. If there’s something holding you back from what it is that you’re trying to move towards, let’s figure out where the money is. What are the big things, what are the biggest leverage points? And so, you’ve identified them. One is, how am I going to deal with this desire that I have to protect my time and not move towards burnout? And then the second is, how am I going to deal with not being technical enough? Which in a way, if we kind of pull back bigger picture, is really a fancier career-oriented way of saying, “Am I good enough for this role? How do I deal with folks feeling like I might not be good enough and me feeling like I’m not good enough?” Okay?
JULES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to offer that we start with the second one, this I’m not technical enough. Because you have shared that this is something that you face consistently.
JULES: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You said that when you faced that, you’ve done a pretty good job of focusing on the value that you do bring. So elaborate on that for me a little bit. What’s the process you go through in the past when you have felt like or somebody questioned your technical knowledge? Did they question your technical knowledge? Is that what would happen?
JULES: It’s not even that they questioned my technical knowledge. It was because my background was so different than theirs, that I didn’t even have their technical knowledge to begin with. They would see my resume or see my background and say, “Well, she’s not an engineer. She can’t lead us. She shouldn’t be in this role.” And so, I remember at this secret company, secret job, which again is not the role I’m in now… This is a different company I’m in right now. But that job, there was an individual who came onto the team about a year after I had joined. And I had already become a manager at that point. And he had it out for me. He bullied me. He talked smack to my team about me all the time and to others, my peers, saying, “She doesn’t have the right background for this role. I should be in her position. I should have her team.” He was relentless for months. I did what I could to go through the proper channels. HR, my manager, blah, blah, blah. Nobody was bold enough to take action for a long time. Finally, they did get him out of that organization, but the damage was already done for me. My confidence was completely shot, and I’m actually getting a little emotional thinking about it at the time. It really rocked me to my core because that was my first leadership role. And to have somebody come in and say, “You’re not good enough,” for this thing that I really, really wanted. I’d been wanting to be a manager and a leader for so long at that point, and nobody had given me a shot until that role. And for somebody to come in and do that just really shook me. So, I was really fortunate to have a lot of support during that time from other people, mentors, and friends, and things like that, that got me through it. And the fact that I continued to be asked to take on leadership and management roles and in new companies as well helped me rebuild my confidence. Being able to see myself successful in leading engineering teams and teams where I didn’t necessarily have the background or the expertise, and see those successes be recognized by others also helped me rebuild my confidence. However, I still have that trauma that kind of follows me around. Now, what’s my process? I think meeting a few mentors who really had the language to define what it is that I was good at. I think what I’ve learned is we have a lot of language for what I would call the hard skills. The engineering, the programming, the stuff that is very quantifiable. But we don’t have a lot of language for what we call the soft skills, or what I call actual people and leadership skills. We don’t use a lot of language around those. And that is language like empathy, and listening, and pausing before you act. So things like that. Building community. Those are terms that are not traditionally used to describe leaders. So learning that those were words that I could use to describe myself and the connection that they had to excellent leadership helped me start to define what it was that I brought to the table that was unique and special about me as a leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: At first listen, it might have seemed like JULES had a fairly straightforward career planning issue she wanted to tackle. She’s proven herself, and her leadership team wants to give her the leeway to design her latest role, and to build a job that serves her best skills and contributes most effectively to the organization. And JULES came to our coaching conversation hoping to get that guidance on how to define that role. But what we’re finding out is that what’s holding her back is not the notion of not knowing what she wants. It’s her concern that others will doubt her as that one manager did in the past. As the author Melody Beattie once wrote, “You should not limit your future by your past.” That said, as a coach, it’s very important that I meet my clients where they are. And in JULES’s case, she was still with emotions of being bullied by her manager. Now, I’m not a therapist. So, my job is not to revisit, unpack, and help her or any of my clients heal from what they name as trauma. Instead, I can acknowledge her experience and use it to help her see what choices she has in front of her as she decides how to approach this next role. That’s where we went next in our coaching session. So let me first of all acknowledge what you went through, because that’s not easy. So I don’t want to belittle or dismiss that experience that you had, particularly in your first leadership role, and then exacerbated by the fact that the people who should have helped you and support you did not. Okay? That can make you feel like you are standing alone in those situations. I can now understand when you said your brain says this to you, I went out on a lip and said, “I think that’s the protector part of you.” That protector part of you is very smart. It’s trying to protect you from that happening again. That said, we have no idea if this will happen again. We have absolutely no idea. I wish I could tell you. I wish I had a crystal ball to be able to say, “Oh my gosh, that is going to happen, Jules. Do not take that job, right? Here’s the ask. Demand that that person is fired before you take the job.”
JULES: Yeah, that would be nice.
MURIEL WILKINS: But we have no idea. That’s out of our control. And I also can’t promise, “That’ll never happen again.” That would be so glib for anybody to do. That’s out of your control. What’s in your control is to think through how would you respond the next time, if you walked into this job or any job, quite frankly, and your credibility is questioned.
JULES: Oh, wow. That’s a question I’ve never thought about before. And I think the immediate instinctual response I have is I would fight. I would stand up for myself, and I would stand up for myself on behalf of other women who might be going through this as well. Because if I stand up, maybe that gives somebody else the courage to stand up and do for themselves, and what they’re going through. What does that mean though? What does it mean to stand up for yourself? I think I would try not to get myself in that kind of situation again in the first place. And I know you just said we can’t predict the future, but I think there are a few indicators that I learned from that experience. One is that having a supportive manager who cares about the wellbeing of his or her direct reports is really critical. Someone who’s a champion and a sponsor, who’s not going to let this fly either, I think is pretty critical. Because if you don’t have that air cover, it makes it so much harder to fly it yourself, for yourself. And then the other one is… I think when I say fight, I mean go big. Do all the things I know how to do as a manager. Document everything, record everything within my legal limits. Go to HR at the very beginning, go to my manager, go to anybody through the official channels, and just make a lot of noise. And let them know that this is not acceptable. Because I think when I went through that bullying, I did some of that. But I was also dealing with the questioning myself. “Is he right? Is going to HR the right thing?” I was just sort of dealing with both my own internal struggle and trying to figure out how do I actually work within the system to deal with this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so there’s a couple of things there. Okay? Number one is if you haven’t done so already at some point, part of your assignment when we get out of this coaching meeting is to cut yourself some slack for how you responded back then. You are a different person now than you were then. You were a different person the day after, right? The month after. And so, it’s not a, “I should have done this.” Keep in mind I asked you, “What would you do if this happened again?” Not, “What do you think you should have done?” There is no should. You did what you could do. You did what you were at the capacity to do. So give yourself credit for that. And you are still pretty effective at doing your role, so let’s not forget that. Number two is I think a little bit of what happened from what you shared where you said, “Yes, I was trying to respond to the situation. And at the same time, I was wondering if what this person was saying was true about me. Maybe I’m not good enough. Maybe I can’t do this. Maybe I’m not the right person for the role.” You have to be really careful of letting somebody else’s voice supersede or become your voice. Because the minute that happens, somebody else is running you.
JULES: That is very wise. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So how do you do that? You’ve got to be able to distinguish it. You’ve got to be able to create some space. “That’s that person. I hear what they’re saying. I also know that they have a right to their own opinion, but that’s not my reality.” And if you’re not sure whether you can do the job or whatnot, then you got to go get some other data points. But be very careful of letting another person’s voice dictate anything about your worth for the role or your worth in any type of way. Okay? So, that’s something as you move into any role, to be careful of. Because this was an extreme situation, but it also has been a repeated pattern for you where you feel like, “Oh my gosh, they look at my background.” And then they wonder, “Can she lead? Can she do the job?” So the fact of the matter is you do have a different background, so you can say, “Yep, I do.” But that doesn’t mean you can’t lead. That’s the story part.
JULES: Yeah. It’s funny too, because I have so much evidence now that that is the case, that I can lead. And I’ve even had the same technical people come to me a year later being like, “You’re the best manager I’ve ever had. I didn’t think this would work out, but it was great.” So I have all this evidence. Sometimes I’m just not giving it as much weight.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And that’s your choice, Jules, how much weight you want to give it. How much space. We talked about how much space is this taking up for you. So it doesn’t mean that you forget it and dismiss it and say, “Oh my God, it never happened.” No, it did. But how much space you give it, how much weight you give it. There’s a part of… We all have to acknowledge anything that’s happened, and it can inform us, but it doesn’t necessarily have to dictate what happens next. And so that’s the differentiation for you. Okay?
JULES: Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, here’s the thing. What would it look like if every situation you walked into, that’s actually the case? That people are like, “She doesn’t have the same background as us. How the heck is she going to be able to lead me?” What would that look like for you?
JULES: I’ve thought about my response to this. And what I’ve come up with, I think is, I was brought in to do this job, not because I have your expertise. We already have your expertise on this team. It’s you. I was brought in to do the thing that this team doesn’t have and needs right now. Which is help this team gel, helping you guys to build trust with each other, helping you all to gather and collaborate to create a sense of purpose and a roadmap for the team. All of those things I do really, really well. And you all are lacking that right now. You don’t need more people with this kind of expertise. What you need is what I’m bringing to the table.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So you have a response, or at least a perspective of what you would be able to present or what you would be able to share if you were faced with resistance when you first come in. Now what if you walk in and they say, “You have a different background than us, and that’s it. Okay, whatever. Let’s move on.” What would that look like for you?
JULES :Yeah, I guess if it was presented in a neutral way, I would acknowledge that because I actually think that that’s the strength of mine. “Yes, I do have a different background than you, and I hope over time you’ll come to see that that’s something that can help this team out. I bring a diverse set of perspectives and experiences that I think will really be an asset to this team. And I would love to learn more about what you do so that I can figure out how to best help you do your job.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. And I might suggest that there’s an invitation to learn from each other, because they have just as much to learn from you as you have.
JULES: Right, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So that’s scenario number two. Scenario number three is you walk in and the reaction is, “She doesn’t have the same background as us. But man, we are so glad she’s here, because we need somebody with a fresh perspective. We need somebody who can bring this team together.” What does that look like for you? And what’s your response?
JULES: “Let’s get started. Let’s go.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you might be wondering, why did I run you through those three scenarios? What we basically walked through is worst case scenario, best case scenario. And what you have just shown is that you have the capacity to deal with each and every one of them. No matter what happens, you’ll be able to deal with it. So the concern shouldn’t be around your inability to deal with what happens. What’s really getting at you is the uncertainty about what’s going to happen.
JULES: Yeah. I think the uncertainty and also the anxiety that the worst case may happen. And that will poke at my soft spot.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, we all have that. But here’s the big leadership skill that you’re building here. You’re ready for it? Dealing with ambiguity.
JULES: JULES? JULES dealing with ambiguity again.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, the fact is everything’s uncertain. We don’t really know what’s going to happen tomorrow. We don’t even know what’s going to happen in the next hour. We think we know, right? We think we know based on what’s happened in the past. And so what’s happening with you is you feel very strongly there’s a voice that’s louder than you want it to be that’s telling you, “This is probably going to happen again because it’s happened in the past.” But we don’t know. We don’t know. But what you do know is that if it did happen, you now have a plan of action. You have more capacity than you did the last time around. You actually have a response.
JULES: That’s very helpful. It’s so funny because when you said dealing with ambiguity, that’s also part of what I’ve assumed is part of my brand as well. It’s like I’m great at coming into chaos, managing ambiguity, blah, blah, blah. That’s something I say to people about me, and then yet when I’m faced with this particular piece of ambiguity, I’m like, “No, I can’t deal with it.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? Exactly. Well, you can. You just haven’t wanted to. Yes know? You can. You can. So whatever it is that you’re doing out there in dealing with business ambiguity and your team’s ambiguity, it’s easier because there’s some distance. It hasn’t been as close to you, right? It’s out there. Deal with this the same way. If it were out there, how would you deal with it?
JULES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you used the word, your confidence was impacted in a big way in the past by situations where your credibility for the role was questioned. Confidence doesn’t necessarily come from things going our way. Confidence comes from knowing that no matter what happens, you’ll be able to deal with it. So even if things don’t go your way, you have to ask yourself, “Can I still get through it?” You might not like it, you might not want it. It might not be fun. But can you get through it? That’s where confidence comes from.
JULES: Yeah. That is very, very true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. When I say it that way, how do you assess your confidence then?
JULES: It’s funny. When you said that, I had this recollection of this time I got laid off. Whenever I tell people that story, especially now, there’s so many layoffs going on, that people are like, “What I do?” That people are scared and wanting comfort. And I always tell them, “That was the best thing that ever happened to me.” Not only did I recover from it and get another job, but I tried a totally different industry that I was interested in for a little bit, which was a lot of fun. It led me to the career that I have now, which is a career of leadership where I, again, am really developing myself and love what I do. And so when I think about how do I assess my confidence, it’s exactly what you said. It’s like knowing that I was able to go through adversity, and overcome it, and thrive even after it, or maybe even because of it, is a huge part I think of my personal story, and potentially maybe not as huge of a part of my professional story. Because I wouldn’t say there’s major moments of my career where I’ve failed and overcome it. So maybe the confidence that I feel personally is definitely strong. The confidence that I feel professionally is still being developed. Because again, I don’t think I’ve gone through major failures other than that incident. Generally, it’s been pretty good.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, let me tell you something. Confidence doesn’t really discriminate, right? We compartmentalize it, right? To say, “Well, I’m confident in this area, but I’m not confident in that area.” Confidence does not discriminate. It is the same secret sauce that you can apply on every single dish. So this notion of I have confidence personally, but professionally I don’t. Again, confidence is this feeling. It’s a feeling that whatever happens, I’ll be able to deal with it.
JULES: Yeah. You asked me how I would assess my confidence. If I really just think about where is the source of my confidence, I guess what comes to mind is I’ve got… This is going to sound a little woo-woo, but I’ve got this warm, glowing ball inside of me that’s my values, the things that I stand for, the people I care about. My personal worth, how I feel about myself. And it’s this thing that generates energy for me. It generates the confidence I think I would say. Sometimes that feeling is very strong, and very clear and crisp. And sometimes that glowing ball is sort of overshadowed. Overshadowed by something else, someone else, something said. Where I can’t draw on that energy, or I forget to draw on that energy and to have that confidence. So maybe I can describe it that way. That’s kind of how I see it for myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, no, I love that visual and that you have that for yourself. And I also want to point out one little thing that you said in that. You said, “Sometimes it feels like I can’t draw from it.” And then you move to, “Or I forget to draw from it.” That warm light that you have inside of you, that ball that you have in you that you describe as your confidence, it is always there. The question is, do you always tap into it? And that’s a choice. I can’t sit here and say with the wave of a magic wand, here’s how you do it. You have to tap into it. You have to be able to say, “Okay, can I work through this? Have I worked through other things before that I don’t know? Have I dealt with people who questioned my credibility before and still thrived?” Yes, I have. Okay. Well, I know I have the capacity to deal with it if it happens again. Very different than liking it, right? It’s like my daughter. When she was younger, she hated… Well, she still hates it, getting shots. And she’d be like, “But it’s going to hurt. It’s going to hurt. I hate it.” And she would cry the whole way to the doctor’s office, and then we’d get there and she’d scream. All until the point where they actually gave her the shot and then she would just get quiet. And then after she’d be like, “Okay, I’m done.” So every time I would say to her, “But you’ve been through this before.” And what she realized is what was causing her the most angst was the anticipation of the shot rather than the shot itself. So I think part of this for you is, am I technical enough? Am I going to be seen as not technical enough? Part of it is being able to tap into the confidence that you do have, rather than thinking you don’t have the confidence. And that’s a choice and a practice, a daily practice. We’ve spent a lot of time in this coaching session going through possible scenarios that JULES might face in her job. This is a really helpful strategy to use when coaching others or yourself when you’re really not quite sure what direction to go in. Play out the different scenarios. Worst case, best case, middle of the road. The point in going through such an exercise is not to nail every detail. It’s to show you that in most cases, regardless of what happens, you’d find your way through it. And that’s where you find your confidence, in the knowing that you can deal with whatever is ahead. As Jules reached that point, we were now ready to go back to her initial question regarding what it is that she wants in her new role, especially in terms of her need to feel supported.
JULES: I’m not sure how to articulate exactly what it is I’m looking for. I can tell you what I’m liking that I’m seeing right now. The particular leader, manager that I would be reporting to in this new role has said to me many times in many different meetings over the past year that he values me. He thinks I’m an excellent leader, that I’m being underutilized right now, and he wants to put my skills to use in all of these other areas of the organization. He’ll do whatever it takes to make sure that I’m happy and successful. He says all the right things. So those are all great things to hear if you’re going into a new role and you want to know if you’re being supported, is knowing that you already have a fan, basically.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So you’re feeling like the intent is there?
JULES: I think some of my hesitation actually comes from I’m not sure if he knows how to support me. He says the right things. And I’ve seen this in other topics and areas around the organization not related to me, but where he has the good intent, he says the right things. And I believe he believes he has good intention, but he can’t back it up with action. So I worry about that a little bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would you do? What would you do if you had a team member and you were like, “You know what, this is a team member that I really want to support”?
JULES: I think one thing that actually comes to mind is I would actually start out by trying to be really clear about what I can and cannot do. I would try to set the expectations as realistically as possible. And I think maybe that’s where things are in question for me with this new manager is the intention is there, but I think the expectations with me, I want to know really what in reality can he do, versus what does he want to do or would like to do. But realistically, what can he do and what can he not do? Because if he can’t do something for me, I need to know about it because I need to know what I’m getting into or what I’m going to need to compensate for. So when you phrase it that way, what I would do for my own team, I would come in and I would let them know, “I’m here to do this. This is what I’m good at. This is what I’m committed to doing for you. I can’t do this right now for whatever reasons, or this is not what I’m going to be focusing on. This is not going to be my priority right now. I can’t have the resources to do this right now.” I’m just trying to be really realistic with the expectations for the team of me. And I would want the same I think for my managers. I would want him to be real with me. “Tell me for real what you can do and not do.” Because we all watch everything. We want to do everything for our teams, but we can’t always do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m hearing from you is I just need to get a really good sense of what the expectations will be. What’s possible, what’s not possible, what’s in scope, what’s out of scope, so I can make a realistic assessment as to whether A, it’s something that I want to do. B, what is it going to require of me? C, if I am going to need additional resources, what those might be? I would suggest that you have that conversation with this person. There might be parts he might not know still, right? You’re trying to make an assessment. You’re trying to make a hypothesis, a very well-informed one. And then once you’re in it, I mean, this happens with everything. I dream up my vacations all the time. I imagine, I do all this research. And then I get there and it either surpasses my expectation, is right according to what I expected, or doesn’t quite match up. But no matter how much research I did before, it would’ve never replaced the reality of it when I’m there. So you’re doing as much research as you can, but you also have to understand that once you get there, it might not necessarily be exactly as expected. And that’s okay. Why? Why is that okay?
JULES: Because I’m good at dealing with ambiguity.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. Good for looking back at your notes. Okay. So I think this piece around not technical enough, there’s some inner work which we’ve talked about. You have the capacity to deal with whatever happens. And then there’s the outer work, which is, you need to go and clarify expectations with your manager. You need to see over and beyond your manager, are there other people that you can identify who can be champions for you? And I would say go have the same conversation. Maybe even ask explicitly, “How can you support me in this role? Here’s one of my concerns. I have very different background than the team I’m going to lead. What can you do to help me onboard so that it mitigates, not dismisses, but kind of mitigates a little bit, makes people feel more at ease about me being their leader.” And if they’re like, “I don’t know. What do you want me to do?” “Okay, I want you to introduce me. I want you to come to the meetings and have my back. I want you to be here to bounce things off with me, so that I can differentiate between what we can do. I want you to be able to champion if I decide that we need additional resources. Are you ready to do that?”
JULES: Yeah. I think going and asking how you can support with the specific concern, I think gives them a little something more concrete to really understand how they can help me.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. Okay. So the other part that you had, the other blocker was around you feeling like you have limited time and energy, and being very conscious of boundaries that you want to set to ensure that you’re not being set up to head into burnout. What would make you feel in any job, that you have boundaries, or what are the principles that you want to be able to operate within that make you feel like it will mitigate getting into burnout and honor the time and energy that you do want to give to your job?
JULES: The one that comes to mind immediately is flexibility. I think this is not just with my time necessarily. It is time, but also flexibility in the way that I do things. Nobody likes being micromanaged, but I don’t like being micromanaged. I don’t like somebody looking over my shoulders, not observing, but scrutinizing my process and that sort of thing. I don’t mind people knowing about my process. I just want to feel like I have the freedom to experiment. And then also with the time, I want to feel like if I am tired, if I spent a lot of energy in meetings that morning, I can go take a break. I want to have the freedom to manage my own energy based on how I’m spending it at work and not be stuck on a certain schedule or feel like I’ve got too much in my calendar that I can’t make that space or make that time. The other one is, I think purpose. So feeling like what I’m working on matters. People want it. People see the value of it. I like it. I think that’s a big one. I feel like I’m getting something out of it. And what I enjoy getting out of things is I enjoy learning. I enjoy growing, and I enjoy seeing how what I’m doing is adding to my repertoire or to my toolbox of things that I know how to do as a leader. And then the third one is the people in the community. Because I think that’s a piece of it too. Feeling like I’ve got a community of people who… This would be both my direct team and also the support I’ve built around myself. Feeling like I have that community and I have that support I think is really important. So feeling like my team has my back. If I get overwhelmed or if I get too much on my plate, feeling like they have the capacity and have the ability to take on some of that work. Feeling comfortable delegating basically. For my support team, feeling like they’re in on what’s going on with me. They know what’s up, and I can call them up at any point and be like, “I need your advice. I need to vent.” Whatever it is I need in that moment, feeling like I have that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So what do you feel is in your control to help fulfill all of these areas that you talked about? Flexibility, purpose, learning, community of support, usefulness, not futility.
JULES: I think the community piece, definitely my support community. It’s something I’ve been really trying to build and strengthen over the last six months or so, and I think I’m making some good progress there. So that one, I definitely feel like if I invest time in, it will pay dividends. I think the personal growth one is interesting because I usually have a growth mindset. Not always, but usually. And I’m usually able to extract some wisdom or learning from a situation. I don’t know if I have a lot of control over the flexibility piece. This is probably one that I am concerned about, because right now there’s a lot of fires that need to be fought, or at least that the leadership thinks need to be fought. And so I worry about those getting thrown at me a lot, and not being able to make the space to re-energize, and just being constantly in firefighting mode. I think that’s one that I’m not sure I have control over, other than maybe holding some boundaries. But I don’t even know what that looks like right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I think that’s it, right? So what’s your ask? When you said that, I said, “Well, what do you want in terms of flexibility?” If I said to you, “You want to be flexible?” Well, what does that mean to you?
JULES: “I need you to stop throwing fires at me.” I think a little bit of it, it’s not that these fires… It’s not that they don’t need to be fought. But maybe if I had a few questions I could ask him that would help distill or to diffuse the anxiety a little bit and let him really think clearly about, “Does this need to be addressed this moment by me?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, that’s a good place to start. Right?
JULES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I also think there’s some setting of expectations. We started off this conversation by you saying, “I’m sort of holding all the cards right now so I can ask for things.” Okay, so what if you ask or what you set the expectation? “Look, the way that I manage my calendar is, you might look at it and there’s probably going to be one or two blocks or two or three blocks a week on my calendar. My ask is that those are respected, because it’s when I am able to do heads down work, or when I have my thinking cap on, or where I just need to re-energize from these other things. Now manager, I understand that things pop off and things need to be addressed. So, it’s not that I don’t want to address those things, but I’m just going to ask that if they happen to fall at the same time is when I have this other thing going on, can we really question whether it needs to be done in that moment?” Not whether it needs to be done at all. It’s no different than when I set my out of office email. There are times when I set my out of office, but you know what, you can reach out to me. And then there are other times where I’m like, “Do not reach out to me.” I want you to think two, three times before you send me an email. But that’s setting the expectation. All they can do is either agree to it or not agree to it, and then you take it from there. But the only thing that’s in your control right now is actually setting the boundary and setting the expectation around the boundary, and calibrating with your manager whether that’s a boundary that he can live with. And I would say it’s the same with everything else. I think there’s an expectation setting conversation with this manager that you might be working with to say, “Look, here are the five things that are really important to me in whatever role I take next. And here’s what they would look like in very concrete terms. If I start feeling like I’m not getting anywhere because of what’s happening and decisions aren’t being made, can I come to you so that we can talk through it, and you could be helpful to me in moving it forward? Or you can be real with me and tell me, ‘It is what it is right now. There’s nothing we can do. Channel your energy into a different direction.'” You can have those conversations. They’re all what if conversations
JULES: Have the if conversations.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. But it will be more helpful and more productive for you to have those conversations if you articulate them in concrete terms.
JULES: Yeah, I think that’s a really good point is I need to write those things down. I need to think about those things. What are the concrete things that I need? Yeah, you’re right. I can’t expect him to give me those things if one, I haven’t asked for them. And two, I don’t have examples of what-
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, definitely, if you haven’t asked for them. I mean, he could. If he’s the world’s most ideal manager, he would. He would knock on your door saying-
JULES: Divine what I’m thinking.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes, exactly. But that’s not happening. Right? So it’s about you empowering yourself to dream up what it is. Put a hypothesis. It doesn’t mean that’s what it’s going to be, right? Hold it lightly. And then going and saying, “Hey, I’m seriously considering this. I’m excited about it. Here are the things that would make me really want to do this. And so I just want to talk about what the possibility is.” And then it’s a discussion.
JULES: I wrote dream it up and ask for it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because you never know. What do they say with the lottery? You can’t win it if you’re not in it or something like that? Powerball.
JULES: You miss 100% of the shots you don’t take, all that.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. All of that. All of that. So the same applies here. Okay? So it’s all about the ask. The fact that you’ve outlined what the parameters are is the place to start. It’s like buying a house or going and looking for a house. “I want it to be in this type of neighborhood and I want it to be more in an urban area versus a country area. And I kind of want it to be open space versus closed space.” Okay, that’s great. Then we need to start getting concrete. How many bedrooms, how many bathrooms? What’s the distance between here and the closest store? Do you want a fireplace? Do you not want a fireplace? Do you want a yard? Do you not want a yard? Then we start getting concrete. So you’re sort of at the outer layer of the parameters, and now you just want to put some examples against it and test them out. Test them out. Okay?
JULES: Yeah. And when I was thinking about what resources do I need, I was actually thinking of them not even for myself. It was coaching for my team, coaching for the organization, those kinds of things. And I think this has made me realize I need to also, with equal or even more weight, look at what are my asks for me personally. Basically, to help sustain myself as an individual going through this role. What do I need in terms of support?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes, what do you need? And ask for those things. Absolutely. Okay? And realize that when you’re doing on a personal level, you are building the capacity to articulate what your team needs and then being able to ask for what your team needs. I do feel like maybe a part of you is like,” I don’t really know what my team’s going to need, so I don’t know what to ask.” Okay. So then what’s the next best thing you can ask for? The next best thing is, “Look, I want to be given an opportunity when I come in and start managing the team to make an assessment of what they need, and to be able to come back to you and say, ‘Here’s my assessment. And I’m going to need some things.’ Are you open to that? Will there be room and space for me to make that assessment, and then talk about what resources we might need?” And let him answer. Okay?
JULES: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I would love to hear from you. I know you’ve jotted down a lot of things, but I’d just love to hear from you, what are your biggest two or three key takeaways? Where’s the money at for you today?
JULES: The two big blockers were a big one. But I think even before that, when we went back to the heart and the brain analogy that I used about my heart being excited about this role and my brain saying like, “Whoa, whoa, whoa.” It’s almost like coming up with a process to address the brain piece of it. Because I think what we did here was we said, “Okay brain, you have legitimate concerns. Let’s break them down one by one and really analyze what’s in your control, what’s out of your control, what do you need, what are you going to ask for.” And I think doing that so that the brain is not the inhibitor or not the one holding me back while I’m trying to go forward, but that it’s being validated and also comforted with data, basically, I think for me is actually a really valuable skill that I would love to exercise more in the future. Because I know these kind of situations are going to come up again. They come up all the time in little ways in life too. It’s like, “You want to go take that vacation?” It’s like, “I don’t know. Yes. But so much work.” Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
JULES: So, this is a thing with me, I recognize. And I think having the ability to go through it step by step like this is going to help me a lot in being able to move forward with confidence. And with the comfort, knowing that my feelings were validated, my brain feelings were validated, and that we went through each of the feelings and cooked up the situation or the scenario and the answer to that scenario. So yeah, I think actually that for me is the big takeaway from this call.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. And you can practice that, as you said, every single day. Right? Just literally by being able to notice and saying, “Okay, what is going on?” Just start with that. All right?
JULES: Yeah. Yes. Thank you very much, Muriel. This has been really illuminating and valuable for me. Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, thank you. In some ways, Jules was presented with kind of an ideal scenario, being able to design the job that she wants. But sometimes, what feels like the biggest opportunities can also feel the most overwhelming as this one did for Jules. Her ability to recognize the past experiences and emotions that were causing her angst about her new situation helped her move forward. In a way, Jules needed to approach defining her new role like writing on a whiteboard. She could either write over the messy scribble that’s already on there, or she could wipe the board clean and start from there. She chose the latter. By focusing on what’s in her control, having confidence in her ability to deal with whatever happens moving forward, and being clear about the boundaries and support that she needs to perform at her peak, Jules is now in a much better position to design what she wants her future role to look like, and ask for what she wants. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: This organization was a great fit for me. It leaned on past experience, and a passion of mine with the mission. But it’s just not being heard, and it’s just like I should have seen red flags like, “That’s something I got to watch out for.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions, become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me in my newsletter on LinkedIn @murielwilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Find Meaning in My Work?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Kurt to protect his confidentiality. He’s taken a non-traditional career path by pursuing his college degree later in life.
KURT: I started undergrad at 30 as an experiment. I think at 30 years old, you’re pretty well-rounded in the sense that you have a good sense for yourself, and I just never, I think maybe I didn’t grow up with a lot of family members that have advanced degrees, education was never really a focal point. Income was a focal point, but not education. And I was also riddled with anxiety. The thought of being in a classroom and somebody calling on me was very scary, so I think by labeling it an experiment, it allowed me the space to fail. I went in with the assumption that I would do well, but left myself the doorway with which to escape if needed, if it wasn’t going well.
MURIEL WILKINS: That experiment went well for Kurt and opened him up to other career possibilities.
KURT: I just threw the doors off of what I wanted, and just started really focusing on what I could do. When I started thinking about a career path, I was like, “Well, if I could do anything, what is it that I would want to do?” I really strongly considered the MBA path, and being a little bit more of that entrepreneurial mindset, but I’m also extremely risk averse. And so, recognizing that in myself, I was also thinking, “Well, maybe law school is a good idea, so I could help business owners in the same way that I had, to some extent in my former career pathing, but do so in a way where that risk aversion was a part of the plan.” So, I wrestled with those ideas and landed in law school.
MURIEL WILKINS: Kurt went on to get his law degree and worked as an attorney, which he didn’t find very satisfying. He’s moved to another organization in the legal sector, but in a capacity where he’s not practicing law. I started our coaching conversation by asking him about how he’s feeling about his role, and what’s happening in his career now.
KURT: That’s a good question, “What is happening now?”, Muriel.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
KURT: Nothing. I feel like I’ve got to this point and it’s not the thing. It is a thing, it is a thing that allowed me to leverage my degree and my experience and not feel like I destroyed all that by pivoting again. But I recognize that it’s not the thing, but there’s part of me that says, “Well, you can’t just keep pivoting every two seconds until you find the thing. You need to settle in and make a living and rise up through the ranks and continue getting promoted,” and so I think what I’m really finding myself in is this spiral of uncertainty of, where do I go next? What is the next step in order to stop the pivots, or stop the continuously looking at the next thing? I think it was like Mel Robbins was like, “You don’t put all this work into something for nothing. You didn’t survive this long in order to be unhappy,” and it’s not that I’m unhappy, but I do recognize that this is not the thing that I want to be doing for the rest of my life. And so, I think that’s where we’re at now is, what’s next?
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s next?
KURT: Where do we go from here?
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, goodness gracious. I don’t know, Kurt, where do we go from here? We’ll try to figure something out. Okay, so how do you know that this is not the thing? This isn’t it?
KURT: Some of it’s this voice in my head that I think I’ve recognized being there since I was a kid that was like, “You will feel successful when you feel successful,” if that makes any sense. So, it’s that emotional connection to what I do is what I’m missing. I think that I thought with the practice of law that I would be helping businesses and helping others succeed in what they do. I thought that would be the emotional check that I needed. But what I found was I was just lining other people’s pockets, not making any difference, I was just making people richer. And that was uncomfortable to me. And I think a lot of the reason why I didn’t have the emotional connection to the practice of law. In my current role, I am lucky in that I do have more of an emotional connection because I do get to help others in their career progression, that is really rewarding to me, but it’s not the right emotional connection to the profession that I feel like I need in order to make this the thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. And so, if there was an abundance of emotional connection and not a lack of, what would that look like? Describe it for me.
KURT: I go back to prior to this journey, one of the jobs that I had, it was a small business. I was really emotionally connected to helping the owner get her business to be successful. I was connected to her, I wanted to see her succeed, and so I put in a lot of extra time and space that I wasn’t necessarily being paid to do in order to help achieve her dream of what the business would look like. That was so strong an emotional connection and a charge that even on days when I hated what I was doing, it was enough to make me really smile, get up and go and do the thing, because I knew that what we were doing was the really good stuff and we were really creating something. That is the abundance of the emotional connection that I’m looking for is that ability to wake up in the morning and say, “Today’s going to be a really hard day, but it’s not hard for me to put a smile on and do it because it’s worth it, because we’re doing the right thing,” and I recognize today, that though I love my team, I actually really, truly love the firm that I work for, on days that are hard I get up and say, “Today’s just going to be hard,” and I can’t kick myself out of it because I don’t have a connection to something in order to pull me through that. So, I just spend the next two days boiling over how unhappy I am in the role.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to kind of break it apart a little bit because I think what I’m hearing you say is you’re seeking the emotional connection or the emotional response to something, and that emotional response is, as you put it, “It brings a smile to my face because I know why we’re doing it,” or, “If I don’t agree with it or it doesn’t have that thing, then I spend two days, three days boiling over.” So, there is an emotional reaction that you’re having when something is there or something is not there, okay? So, the emotional connection in the way that you are describing it is more of a reaction rather than the thing itself. And I think we need to get to, what is the thing? All right? I’m going to ask you a question, which is, in that situation that you described when you were helping the business owner, I think get their business back up on their feet, is that what it was?
KURT: Pretty much, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: How would you describe the meaning that you got out of that? What was the purpose of it, at the end of the day?
KURT: How would I describe the meaning? I think it is the recognition that there was something else there to be done, a hole that I could fill. It felt somehow unique to me. The person that I was, the knowledge that I had, the skills that I had, what I was bringing to the table was the right peg to fit the hole in that environment. And I think that, connected to my actual emotional connection to the individual person, those two things put together, created. I think that thing, that connection or reaction.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so look, what I’m asking you to describe is not… Because I hear you trying to figure out the words to describe it, what I’m asking you to describe is nothing concrete, it’s something intangible, I’m rubbing my fingers. It’s a sense that we have, it’s an energy that we experience. The challenge is trying to understand, what is it that creates that experience? It’s no different than, I don’t know about you, but I can go to one event and come out of it and be like, “Oh my gosh, that was great,” and people would be like, “What was so great?”, I’m like, “The energy, the energy was so great,” and then I can go to another event and I’m like, “Oh, wamp-wamp,” right? What was it? It could have been the same people, same venue, but there was something different. It’s the energy, it’s the experience that we have, how we experience it. So, part of it is what you bring to the table and the other part is what are you going to. And when you describe what you are uniquely bringing as the peg that fit nicely with the hole. The hole is [inaudible 00:09:42] there was a need that you were fulfilling. So, how would you describe in, again, going back to that particular situation, what are the needs that you feel you are uniquely constructed to fill, from a professional standpoint?
KURT: My varied experience based upon what I’ve done from a career standpoint over the course of time, but also the resiliency that I have established or built over time because of the things that I’ve tackled in my own personal and professional life, I’m able to use those as tools. I think that is the hole that I’m most able to fill. It’s harder for me to create a sign and hold it out and say, “I’m looking for this,” because I don’t know when those types of environments create themselves, because it is really unique, something as intangible as you were saying, but intangible as resiliency, as grit, as pluck, as the things that I really do think are some of the benefits that I bring to the table, but are harder to define in some respect.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, what’s interesting to me is I asked you, what is the need that you’re looking to fill, which is something out there in terms of what you bring. What you described is, “Here’s what I bring,” and of course when we have certain attributes that we have and we’re able to use them, it makes us feel good. And so, your ability to put that in service is important to you. What I’m getting at is, in service of what? Because that’s the meaning. Why is that important for you to have resilience for you to bring that personal and professional experience to bear? How is that important to anyone else but yourself, or how can it be of importance?
KURT: I think when I felt that there was some connection there, it’s been in areas where… Yeah, I don’t know how to describe it. The way that the question is presented, I think to be completely honest, it has me spiraling into this, “What if there isn’t anything to bring that to? What if that’s just some sort of personal thing that you’re never going to be able to connect to something, and you’ve been looking for nothing for who knows how long?”, and this sinking feeling inside that suddenly, I can’t even think straight because I’m worried that I’ve been searching for something that doesn’t exist.
MURIEL WILKINS: Kurt, I think you’re giving yourself that escape hatch by doing that, so let’s assume that there is something. This is quite the existential question, right? Because we’re talking about meaning. There’s a fantastic book called,
In Search of Meaning
, and I think at the end of the day, what you’re describing is that: what is the meaning of the work that you want to serve? Because what you have tried out so far isn’t it. The fact that you have pivoted many times tells me that there’s a belief that it does exist, you just haven’t quite grasped it. Here’s the thing: when it comes to figuring out what the meaning of something is or looking for it, we define what the meaning is. It doesn’t come to us in this gold or silver platter. You define what’s important, you define what is of significance, you define what is worth your time, and then you go look for opportunities that reflect that. So this is not a trick question what I’m asking, it’s a challenging question because most people don’t really think about it, but understanding and anchoring around for the sake of, what do I bring these things? What is it that I’m trying to fulfill? What’s the need? What’s the pain point that I’m addressing? Why do I do what I do? And how you define that is totally up to you. I can’t define it for you, but how you define it is totally up to you. And then once you define it, then we can say, “Okay, well then where do you express that?”
KURT: Great.
MURIEL WILKINS: When I say all of that and interrupt hopefully the spiraling, how does that land with you?
KURT: What it reminds me of is one of the experiences that I had in that small business environment was it was a creative industry, it was people that were expressing themselves, and while I did not come from a, “let’s all go to school and get advanced degrees,” background. I did come from a, “let’s create an express background.” And so, even though I consider myself to be a creative in some sense, but I speak creative more than anything else, and I think that is one of the elements that I had in that scenario was that I was the, this is really over-blowing it, I’m not trying to paint myself as this hero in this picture I was not but I was the business side of the model that needed business in order to be successful, surrounded by creatives and trying to interpret that language and that environment, and focusing it in order to make sure that the right decisions were made in order to support it. That was something I identified and that you reminded me of in saying some of the things that you said was that being the interpreter of the creative environment from a business standpoint. That is something that quite frankly I’m longing for, is to be back in a creative environment. I label myself a creative, but I do not do a lot of creative things in the sense that I don’t draw really well, or sing, or anything like that. So, I think my lack of expression of that creativity, I get the benefit of that being surrounded by creative people because I get to have the vibe. I still get the environment, and can speak the language but don’t have to do it. So, I think that is certainly something in the next step that I need is this reconnection to me as a creator.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes in my coaching sessions, it takes quite a while to get a true understanding of a person’s background and the work problem they’re facing. This time around, we really dove in fast. And that’s in part because we’re coming at a leadership challenge from a different angle. While many coaching clients come in to talk about a specific incident or a specific tension with a colleague, a tangible example of something, and then eventually we zoom out to the deeper questions. I quickly got the sense with Kurt that this time around the deeper question is the main pain point. He’s seeking purpose in his work that he isn’t finding so far, despite a number of pivots. And having that purpose in mind is important. Because it really helps guide your career decisions from an intrinsic standpoint rather than only based on external data. Talking about purpose and meaning can feel really ambiguous. So, it was important that I also make it concrete for Kurt. We started to dive into more of the specifics he’s looking for from a job and how he might start getting there. So this is great because I think you’ve knocked out two out of the three elements that I would encourage you to look at in terms of figuring out what’s next for you, whether next is possible where you are or next is somewhere else. Okay. The first is, what environment you operate in. And you’ve just articulated it, like creative environment. You are aligned with being in that type of environment. So that’s very specific. Environment is one thing that you want to look at. The other thing that you want to look at is, what are the types of activities that you are primarily involved in through your work? Are you aligned with those? And I say primarily because it’s never going to be 100%. And from what I hear in terms of what you’ve said is there’s something around helping create, organize out of chaos. Organize and bring structure to problems that arise. What more can you say about that? What do you like to engage in at work?
KURT: Anytime I’m given the opportunity to pick up something that’s been lying there, either because it’s too onerous to deal with, too complicated to handle, not enough people. Anything that’s been sitting there that needs life and direction, that’s what I like to engage with. To put my energy into something to get it off the ground and moving forward. So, I find myself in a professional environment oftentimes picking up the things that are outside of my silo. So I do find out that I spend probably a good chunk of time, probably a third of my working time, doing things that aren’t necessarily aligned in my job description that need to get done because that actually does more closely connect to this idea of, as you articulated quite well, of pulling the chaos together. So I do tend to lean more towards projects that allow me to do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: And this word project is very important. I learned a long time ago, actually, I learned this from another coach, around being able to differentiate in terms of the scope of your work and the time horizon with which you can deal with whatever it is you’re working on. So when you think about projects, they tend to have a shorter time horizon, and it’s more around, hey, there’s a beginning, there’s an end. I see what I need to do. There’s a deliverable. Something needs to be fixed and then it’s fixed or something needs to be built. Whereas something that’s not a project is longer term and might be iterative and it might be cyclical, and we go through the same things over and over again, maybe growing over time. So I hear a couple of things in terms of activity, fix things, build things, project oriented, all activities. So if we lump that together with the creative, we’re starting to come up with a story. I think the piece that’s still missing is for the sake of what? What does this serve? What is the itch that you’re trying to scratch? So maybe I can give an example. Let’s see you say something that’s more creative, actually. You talked about being around creatives. And what kind of creatives? Is it artists, visual artists, musicians? What are the ones that you tend to be drawn to?
KURT: Musicians and visual artists more than anything else. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Musician. Why do they create music?
KURT: I think it connects with them. They are expressing themselves. They are connecting with others through a somewhat magical connection of unspoken beauty. From my point of view, from a creative standpoint, it is about the expression. It’s the ability to get it out in a way that speaks to other people and can be appreciated. And there’s probably an element of what you’re leaving behind.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So let’s just take that. You said in their profession, if I decided to become a musician, I might find meaning in it because one, it gives me an opportunity to express myself, bringing what I have to offer, to bear. And the second is, that music that I create has an impact on others in the way that they experience it. One of the words you used is beauty. Everybody can experience music in a bunch of different ways. But really the notion is, it resonates with someone in a particular way. So when we bring those two things together, the ability to express oneself while at the same time having an impact on the other, there’s meaning there. It makes sense. At the end of the day, why do we need meaning? Because something has to make sense. That’s the reason we look for meaning. That’s what meaning is. When you say what is the meaning of this word, you’re saying, how do you make this word make sense to me? So that’s what we’re looking for you. What is it that you want to express through your work, which the more business-y way of saying it is, what is the value that you bring? That’s one part of the formula. And the other part is what’s the impact that you’re trying to create? How do you want people to experience it? What difference does it make? So when I break it apart like that, what’s coming up for you on both sides of the equation?
KURT: Maybe this is me trying to create a trap door again, but I think my first reaction is, I don’t know. I don’t know what I’m expecting. I think I get the, what am I bringing to the table. I think I understand and I can make that argument. But I don’t know for what? Maybe I do. But I think where I’m stuck, is that all these pivots, the pivots happen because at the time, the thing that I think is the what for, is the basis of those decisions. And then I get there and I’m like, no. That wasn’t it. So now I think I’m completely second guessing myself as to what for, because every time I made that decision along the way, it has turned out to not be the decision. Gosh forbid I actually use that as a teaching moment of saying, well, maybe it’s cumulative and you needed all those experiences to get to where you are, but my mind doesn’t tackle it that way. It’s like, no. You just messed up again. And I think that’s where I’m at now is that, it doesn’t matter… I need to be able to move off of that in order to come up with the what for.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean there’s no messing up here. I think it’s really around… There’s no way you’re going to be able to say, “Oh my gosh, that’s it.” And you know for sure that’s going to be 150% it. You don’t know until you’re in it. Going back to the example of the musician, I mean, look, I’m going to the Beyonce concert. I expect that any song she puts out I’m going to love. But I don’t know. You don’t know until you actually hear it. And then you hear it and you’re like, “Huh, I don’t know. I don’t know if I’m going to love it.” So that’s the experience part. So, you are creating hypotheses when you go in and say, “Hey, I think that’s what it is. I think that’s where I’m going to be able to make the impact that I want to make,” which we still haven’t really defined what that impact is. But I think that’s where I can make that impact, and that’s where I want to make it. But then you don’t really know if it’s going to land in the way that you want it until you’re in it. So I agree with like, hey, maybe this is the time that you should be thinking it’s cumulative and over time you learn more. Yeah. I think that that’s what it is. So in those past experiences when you thought, hey, yes, this is where I can make the impact, what was your hypothesis around what the impact was that you were going to make? How did you define it back then?
KURT: Well, it’s a really good question because I think I have tended in the last few times to make decisions based upon more about what I felt like I was getting out of it, more than what I thought I was bringing to it. Does that make sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: It makes a lot of sense. And I think that’s that other side of the equation that I’m saying we don’t have clarity on it. Not just what you’re going to get out of it, but what are the ecosystem that you’re in? What are they getting out of it? Which is the impact? What difference does it make whether you’re the one that’s there versus the one that’s not there? What’s the dent that you’re making? And that’s the little piece. My hypothesis is that that’s missing. And quite frankly, I think you’re at a place where it’s like you have to decide what’s the dent you want to make. And it doesn’t have to be permanent. It doesn’t have to mean it’s the same dent for the next 40 years. But at least for now, for the next, that’s what it is, until you start seeing a pattern like yeah, you know what, this is it.
KURT: The first thought that pops up, as you were saying that was the sense of, I think that’s why I thought what I’m doing now would be significant because I get the change or the thing I was trying to bring to the table is helping other people. I thought it was just helping other people. Helping other people move their careers forward, move their goals forward. I do get a lot out of it. But I think what I’m missing is those are very limited engagements. It’s coming in, getting them to the next stage of wherever they’re looking to… Helping them, not getting them, helping them, supporting them as they make those decisions. And then it’s over. And then I move on to another one. These limited engagements where I feel like, as you were just speaking, what came to mind was maybe that’s what I’m actually looking for is the same thing but over a longer course of time. A larger project, a bigger something that doesn’t take just a little bit of what I can bring to the table, but takes a significant amount of time and effort and knowledge and stretch thinking to excite me, to keep me motivated. That’s the thing that I’m looking for.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And just to make sure I understand, it’s helping other people move towards their goals and move forward. Is that in a specific area or in general?
KURT: I think the specificity is less important than it being somehow connected to me. And that sounds really self-centered. But what I mean by connected to me is something that drives me emotionally. Not that it’s about me, but that I get excited about it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you do that and you’re helping other people get towards their goals because you come in and apply your magic and are able to create something from nothing, what’s the impact on those others? What difference does it make for them?
KURT: Because I’m envisioning this in various areas, I think it’s hard for me to define it, what it brings to them. But I think providing an environment where you’re delivering something that is helpful, whether that is a new program or a new system or a revised tool. Whatever that happens to be. But something that is useful.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you want to make sure it’s useful and helpful. So we’re starting to get some pieces together. All right. Let me just play back what I’m hearing. Be in a creative environment where you can offer your ability to fix things, build things, bring something from something that might not exist and bring it to fruition, in service of helping others get closer to their goals, whatever their goals might be. But their goals have to be within an arena of something that is important to you. So it could be in an organization as long as you feel like your organization has a mission that you’re aligned with. And you want to be able to do that over the longer term, not these very short term types of projects. Out of everything I’ve just said, what’s missing for you? Not in terms of where you are, but in terms of your, I don’t quite know what to look for.
KURT: I don’t know that I’ve ever thought of it in the complete thought, to be honest with you. What I can’t help but to get stuck on is how.
MURIEL WILKINS: Kind of make that happen?
KURT: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I think if you start going to the how, you’re not going to complete the thought. Because the how, if it trips us up, it’s going to keep us from completing the thought. And what I mean by that is, sometimes I start to think about… Well, actually, this happened this past week for me. I was like, I am going to clean and purge my closet out. And then I didn’t really think about what I wanted it to look at. I immediately went to how am I going to get this done in the four hours of free time that I had?
And immediately it was, there’s no way. There’s no way I can clean a closet. There’s no way. It’s too much. How do I break it down? Versus, thinking about, okay, what do I want my closet to look like? How can I break it down into components? What are the different components of the closet? What’s the goal here? Is the goal to purge it? Is the goal just to reorganize it? Is the goal to color code it? What’s the goal? I immediately went to the how. And guess what, guess what happened?
KURT: No closet cleaning?
MURIEL WILKINS: No closet cleaning was to be had. So as much as I am tempted to go to the “how” with you, I’m going to keep us accountable here. and keep us focused on the what with a promise that we’ll get to the how. Okay? But let’s not let the how trip up the what. And I think you’re almost there on the what. Remember how I just said with the closet, I was like, “What’s the goal?” When you’ve had those moments where you do feel like this is what I’m supposed to be doing, such as the example that you gave with that one business that you worked with, and even when things aren’t going great that day, how did you know when you got home that night that, you know what, Kurt, you say to yourself, “Job well done. I did what I was supposed to do today.” How did you know that?
KURT: I think it was easiest for me to see through others’ eyes coming home and having the person that knows you best probably say to you, ‘Oh, you look so bright,” or, “You’re so cheerful when you woke up this morning,” or reflecting it back on me, that’s how I knew.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
KURT: Because I don’t think I always recognized it on my own, but it was easier to see when reflected to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I’m going to just offer you a thought that if you rely on how others reflect, whether you’ve done a job well done or whether it’s of significance or a meaning for you, it’s going to be very temperamental. Okay? Because what makes meaning for you is what makes meaning for you. And so what I think, this sounds really cliche, but this is that North Star that everyone talks about. I think that’s really where you are. It’s finding that North Star, finding that purpose, finding that meaning that no matter what happens, as long as you’re aligned to that, you’re good. And I might be saying it in a very simplistic way. What you’re dealing with is not simple. There’s nothing easy about it. That’s why most people don’t get to it and then are like, “Oh, my God. I’ve spent a whole career hating what I do.” But if you can figure out what that is, and then make your career an expression of that, it’s not even really about passion. What I do, not to make this about me at all, I’m very clear about how my career serves me and how I serve my career, and what it is an expression of. And that expression, quite frankly, I do it in this career as an executive coach, but I also pretty much understand that even if I wasn’t an executive coach, I’d still be doing that thing. It could just be in some other career. So I’m career-agnostic. It’s more like, “Am I making sure that I’m serving that North Star or aligned with that North star no matter what I’m doing?” There’s a consistency there. And so what I feel like has happened to you is, over time, you have found different pieces of the puzzle, but they haven’t all come together as one. One piece of the puzzle is working with creatives. Another piece of the puzzle is helping others or organizations reach their goals. Another piece of the puzzle is it being long-term. Another piece of the puzzle is what you bring to bear in terms of your skills, your attributes, your experience. And then the one little piece that I think you have experienced but you just can’t articulate it I just said is like, “For the sake of what?” Again, going back to like, “What is the impact I’m trying to make? Am I trying to make people healthier or am I trying to make organizations more profitable? Am I trying to help individuals, one-on-one, achieve better career results?” You pick. There’s no right or wrong. You pick. Really, it’s a huge field of flowers that you can pick, but it’s honing in on which flower do you like best that aligns with who you are.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: As I pulled out more details from Kurt about what he enjoys in his work, what he’s liked in the past, and what he might be missing now, we dug further into the deeper question he’s come to the coaching session with. The North Star, as I’ve said, is something that a lot of people never figure out, but Kurt is getting closer. We just need to do a bit more work to make sure we have all the pieces we need to start to put the puzzle together. And since we explored a fair amount in one direction and he hasn’t quite gotten to an answer, I decided it was time to try another approach. So, I reframed the question and asked Kurt, “When you’re at work, what are the specific kinds of problems that you really enjoy solving?”
KURT: I think it’s the things that people have given up on or that have no resources. I’ll have to talk to my therapist about that one. I wonder if that’s some reflection about something else in there, but-
MURIEL WILKINS: I won’t ask.
KURT: But, no. It’s the things that, not necessarily the things that nobody else wants to deal with, but the things that don’t have the resources or that people are like, “This is just not going to work.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. If you work on those things, what difference does it make?
KURT: The creativity that I do have sees what it can be and uses that as the reason why it should be picked up and given resources.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I mean, there is a story there. You’re the guy who picks up the things that may have been left behind or that are under-resourced, and you figure out a way to make something out of it that adds value, that people then want to, or organizations then want to actually use. And that has meaning to you. I can feel it. I can see it in your face as we’re talking. It’s important. I mean, you tell me. I’m saying it’s important. But why is that important to you?
KURT: Because I think it provides an opportunity to take something that already exists and use it, recycle it, if you will.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what if that doesn’t happen? What’s the problem with that not happening? If you walk in and you’re like, “There are things that are under-resourced that are not… Nobody’s picking them up, nobody’s fixing them, nobody’s creating something out of them.” Why do you even care?
KURT: It’s a missed opportunity with resources that have already been deployed.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what? What’s the big deal about missed opportunities?
KURT: It’s a waste.
MURIEL WILKINS: And? I’m [inaudible 00:39:08] my shoulders. What’s wrong with a waste?
KURT: My brain isn’t putting the words together.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s your emotion telling you right now? Let’s take it out of the brain. What are you feeling when I say that?
KURT: It’s the potential.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s the potential. What about the potential?
KURT: It’s the abundance of opportunity that something could be, and all of the benefits you get from that, lying on the floor because nobody wants to deal with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you will.
KURT: And I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All we’re looking for is the story. There’s no right or wrong. And I’m hearing a story. Not only am I hearing a story, I’m feeling a story. Okay? And the story is… I’m not going to hesitate on what I’m going to say. I know. It’s like, “Damn it. How dare we leave this potential just laying there? I don’t believe in wasting resources. I don’t believe it. And so, I want to do, what’s in my power,” and I’m speaking as Kurt, right? “I want to do whatever I can in my power for us not to waste resources, particularly if there’s huge potential in them. And so whatever I do, I want to make sure that we are using resources in a way that fulfills potential, that we are fulfilling potential, whatever that potential might be. It might be in people, it might be in organizations, it might be in programs. But I am the guy who’s all about making sure we’re not wasting resources, particularly the ones that can fulfill potential, because it’s important to me and I think it’s important to others.” So when I play that back to you, how does it land with you?
KURT: That’s it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because what happens, Kurt, is like when I ask you what’s the itch that you’re trying to scratch, most of us find meaning because there’s something that we see. Right? There’s something. And it might not be bothering anybody else, no, but it bothers us. And that’s the need. We see a need or we feel a need. Or sometimes you might… I don’t know if you’ve ever been someplace and you’re like, “Do you smell that?” And everybody’s like, “No, I don’t smell anything.” I’m like, “I smell it. I smell it. We got to do something. I have to do something. I have to do something.” And that’s okay. But then we make an impact. That’s how we make it done. You say, “Oh, I’m going to work on this stuff.” We haven’t gotten to the how yet, but at least you have a theme. And I think what’s important here is as you start looking at what’s next for you, it’s whatever other career opportunities that you’re going to approach, do they give you an opportunity to address this theme? Is it a place where you can actually scratch that itch? And if it’s not, then it’s probably not the right place for you. And it doesn’t mean you need to be scratching it all the time, but a good proportion, enough of the time. So then you feel like you’re fulfilling, you’re experiencing where there’s a good marriage between what you bring to the table and where there’s a need.
KURT: Yeah. And I think perhaps some of the frustration that I have is I do see little snippets of that in what I do. And I think that’s it, I’m not doing enough of it-
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re not doing enough of it. Yeah.
KURT: … in order for me to be engaged.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And you have to do enough of it. But not just that, you want to do it in a space where it’s dealing with creative people, we’ve already established that. You want to be able to do it for an organization potentially that you believe in what they’re doing. So now, you’re pulling together little ingredients in the recipe versus saying, “You know what? As long as there’s cinnamon, I’m good.” Right?
KURT: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? And then I bring you something, you’re like, “Ah, I forgot to tell you I don’t like apples” I’m like, “All you said was cinnamon.” Then it’s like, “Okay, what do you like?” “Oh, I like oranges.” “Okay, great.” So, then I just bring you the oranges and you’re like, “Oh, but where’s the cinnamon?” “Oh, yeah, I forgot. Okay, cinnamon plus oranges.” So, what we’re doing, I think you’ve had bits and pieces in this cumulative career path that you’ve had, and now it’s like, “Okay, how do I, just like a visual artist, bring all the pieces together, the color, the paint, the vision of what it looks like?” So, play back for me what you are gathering, and then we’ll move to the how. What you are gathering are your list of ingredients for what possibly could be a fulfilling career position to be in right now. What are the different components that you’re picking up?
KURT: I need to be in an environment where I’m surrounded by creatives, where I’m able to apply my experience and skill to bring to life or otherwise see missed opportunities or under-resourced opportunities that I can help to grow and create my own in an environment where I feel an emotional connection or some positive connection to the organization and what they’re doing and the space in which I have the time to truly put all of my effort and all of my resources into developing or spending the majority of my time doing those projects.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I mean, that is a pretty rich picture. So now, let’s talk about how do you make that happen? And I know earlier you said you’re getting a little stuck on the how do you make it happen. What part of the how are you getting stuck on?
KURT: Well, I think there’s two pieces to it. One is, in spite of me being convinced to myself that I have the resources and transferable skills in order with which to do these things, I think it’s harder to always convince others that that’s the case. And I think having spent a decade in law, when I look into creative industries outside of something that’s legally based, I don’t think I’ve had a lot of luck getting traction in general. That is the one how piece that I get hung up on. I think the second how piece is I let that hang me up. I walk into that thought process with a chip on my shoulder, which always stops me from… Not stops me, but it certainly becomes a barrier with which I have to deal with. I think that’s the big thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: One is a practical, like, “Yeah, how do I now make what I’ve done transferable to potentially another environment and get people to buy into it?”
KURT: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the second is the story that you tell yourself about that practical thing.
KURT: Right. Pretty much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I know. The stories we tell ourselves. Well, let’s start with the practical one first. I mean, first of all, I think the place to start, and what I want to give you kudos for is the reality of like, “Yeah, you are going to have to persuade or get people to see how what you bring to the table can be relevant to them, even though it’s being transferred from a different industry.” So, yes, that’s the reality of it. And is it possible? Absolutely. That’s number one. It’s possible. It’s done all the time. Number two, do you need a whole bunch of people to be persuaded? No, you only need one or, hopefully, two, so you get to choose. All right? So, I think it’s really the question, are you willing to put in the effort that it requires in order to make it happen, in order to get to a place where you can tell your story and try to, for lack of a better word, sell yourself. Or is it like, “I know it’s possible, I’m hearing Muriel, but do I really want to do that?” And you have to answer that question before you go down, because it is more of a process than just saying, “I’m just going to go get a job.” It’s more like, “How worth it is it to you?”
KURT: And I think as that relates, the desire, and the ability, and the resiliency needed to do that, I know that I have, and I am 110% sure that I can do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, I feel like there was an and-
KURT: There was an and. But it goes to the next thing. The barrier that I have is keeping the steam to push through the chip on my shoulder. But what I have to keep reminding myself is that, sure there have been pivots along the way. But each of those pivots seemed equally as insurmountable, and I had the similar chip at the time on my shoulder to going into them. But I was able to identify what I thought made the most sense, and push through the chip on my shoulder in order to pivot to something new. So, as I’m thinking about all that, what comes up in my head is, “You just got to keep doing it, this is no different.”
MURIEL WILKINS: This is no different.
KURT: This is just another opportunity for you to identify what the next best step is, and get there.
MURIEL WILKINS: I feel like you are basically living the mission and the purpose that you want to bring to our organizations. You just said to me, what you want to do is go in and find the thing that is resource, but people it’s laying on the floor. But you see the potential, and you want to take that and create it into the potential. Well, I feel like that’s what you need to be doing with yourself. You have the resource, you’re seeing the potential of what you can do, and it’s like, “Okay, be the thing that you actually want to bring to organizations.” I’m sensing there’s this parallel path going on. All right, so this chip on your shoulder, I’m not dismissing it. The chip can stay there, but it doesn’t have to dictate what you do next. And in fact, it hasn’t. It’s trying to, by telling you, “Don’t try again.” But in those moments, we say, “I got you. I’m still going to keep going. Because I haven’t quite found or created the thing that I’m looking for.” That’s a difference too. A distinction. I think you’ve been like, “I need to find the thing.” And I would encourage you, because of the posture that you bring, and what you’ve shared. I think it’s more about creating it. And so what does that mean in practical terms? What I would suggest as an action item is that story that you told me, the components of what you think would be fulfilling for you. Again, our hypothesis as an actionable item. I think one of the places to start, is come up with your list. You’re not looking for a job. We’re not even there. All right? Not looking for a job. Trusted colleagues, people you’ve worked with, people who know you. And I would go, and I would say, “Hey, I don’t know what this looks like, what the organization is, what the position is or whatnot. But here are the ingredients. I don’t know what the final dish is, but here are the ingredients. I’m going to share with you what the ingredients, if you had these ingredients, what dish would you create? What do you think would be a good dish made up of those ingredients?” I think it would be helpful if you asked people, or you went in conversation, and said, “Here are the different components. What do you think a role could look like or the type of company, or where do you think something like this could exist?” And see what they come up with, because I think you’re at a place of really just brainstorming. So many different things that all of those components could make up altogether. So there’s a brainstorming element right now that I would encourage you to live in, versus looking for the one answer.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because I think there are a lot of possibilities here. What do you think?
KURT: I agree. And I think actually it’s the looking for the one answer that has inadvertently become the problem.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what way?
KURT: In some way, I’m expecting there to be some fairy tale moment where the clouds part, the sun shines, and there to be this thing that I walk up to, and we hold hands, and walk into the sunset together. And that’s not realistic.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, man. Kurt, I want to be in that fairy tale with you, but no, I wish it were so. But you know what? I think the fairy tale of, “There’s a world of possibilities.” It’s way more exciting than, “There is, the one thing.”
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you know why? It allows you to pivot. It allows you to have that thing that you said you had had at the beginning. Which I think you sort of looked at it as a bad thing, but at the beginning of our conversation when you were like, “It gave me an escape hatch.” What if it’s not an escape hatch? What if it’s just like, it just gives you options. The ability to say, “Hey, there are a myriad of possibilities, and I’m going to choose to go from one possibility to the other till all the ingredients are fulfilled.” It’s one way of having a career path. Another way is to say, “I’m just going to do this one thing and that’s it. And I’m going to take this very linear approach.” Which by the way, it’s never linear, and just keep climbing, and getting the titles, and the promotion, and the thing. That’s great if that’s what works for you. But it doesn’t work for everybody. And that’s okay. You have to figure out what the right cadence is for you. So, that fairy tale of the one thing maybe hasn’t served you very well. Maybe it’s not yours.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So action item number one, come up with your list. Say, “Over the next couple of months, I’m going to talk to 15 people, share with them my list.” I think the second is I would take a hard look at where you are now, relative to the criteria, which is another way of saying the ingredients. Relative to the criteria that you have, and how does it line up. One is how does it line up? And then secondly, are there any untapped opportunities where you are now, that could fulfill those criteria more so than you’re currently doing? And that’s not to mean that you have to stay there, it’s just making the best use of the time that you’re there.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Give it more meaning than what it’s giving you. What else do you think you could do?
KURT: Pulling together the ingredients in order to share them with others is definitely a huge part of it. But I think just spending enough time with what those components are on my own to really have a clear picture of what that means, is also important. So I think I need to spend some time with some of the things, some of the themes that we’ve discussed today, and see if there’s other things there. And really connect with what those elements and what those criteria are, so that I can live it, manifest it, believe it.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. And I would encourage you when you do that, to really stick to the criteria, to the ingredients, not the dish.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because I think when you start thinking about the dish, you start thinking about all the reasons why the dish can’t be made. So stick to the ingredients, and trust that the ingredients will come together. As long as you pay attention to all of them, you bring them all to bear.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, tell me how are you feeling now versus when we got started?
KURT: Good. I feel it’s one of those situations where through our conversation, all these things have been in my head, or in my heart. And I think that almost caused me more stress to have them flying around. And our conversation has been able to really allow me to pluck things out of the air, pull them together, and start to really see a bigger picture. Which I think is really what I was missing. I was almost unable to move because I couldn’t see the bigger picture.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. It happens. But then you see it, so now you can move at least onto the next action item.
KURT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Thank you.
KURT: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: A lot of people do at some point start feeling dissatisfied with their work. They feel like something is missing, and a lot of the time that translates into a job search to looking to find that meaning elsewhere. But they haven’t always taken the time to really articulate that meaning in the first place, to figure out what it is that’s important to them. I had to try a few different pathways, and a few different types of questions to coach Kurt to that kind of specificity. Along the way, he was also able to start articulating more of his story, which is so important. That story helped him realize that he was getting little snippets of what he wanted, but not enough. Once we’ve laid that groundwork, then it’s time for Kurt, or anyone else in this position, to focus on how the tactical parts of finding a role aligned with purpose. You have to take care of this groundwork first before making the pivot. Otherwise, you’ll just find yourself exactly where you were in the first place, no matter how many different roles you try on. That’s it for this episode of Coaching Real Leaders. Next time…
Speaker 1: I would say I have always been a high performer. Most of my life and my career, I have always been on the lookout for what’s the best way that I can both move up and tap into the things that I’m really passionate about. Because it’s my passion that drives those.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a five-star review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. Want to hear more about each episode? Join the
Coaching Real Leaders
community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. And if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you, and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys from the HBR Podcast Network. I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Work with a Difficult Boss?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Hi, I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months. But on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Benjamin to protect his confidentiality. He’s been mission driven for a long time and has a real interest in helping people.
BENJAMIN: Really, it was in college, I would see a lot of pictures up of different humanitarian aid things internationally, and it would actually… I would almost get stomach pain just thinking about the need out there in the world, people, especially without access to resources or that were struggling. Finally, I literally quit school to go and jump in, just kind of didn’t look back, and eventually I had to go back to school. But it was just kind of just a passion thing for people out there that were struggling.
MURIEL WILKINS: Benjamin has spent the bulk of his career so far working internationally with humanitarian-focused organizations. He moved his way up to middle management and recently landed his first senior leadership role at a nonprofit.
BENJAMIN: But I was itching to get back to really helping people in a direct way. I heard about this nonprofit up here where I am now mainly helping people in recovery, and I just fell in love with the mission and then the founder. She wouldn’t take no for an answer. It was a huge step up for me because I was kind of like middle management with very little kind of impact in the overall organization, and lo and behold, there’s a medium size, but growing nonprofit bringing me on as the executive director supposedly taking over for the founder. And so, I love the mission. I love the model. And so, those are the things I jumped in. I said, “let’s do this.” But yeah, a lot has just gone really downhill.
MURIEL WILKINS: Benjamin reached out because while he’s excited about his new role and has all this passion for the job and the people it serves, he’s running into some trouble dealing with the founder of the organization. So, I started by asking him to share a bit more about how things have gone downhill for him.
BENJAMIN: The founder of the organization that brought me on, she was going to move on after a while. When I got in, she just really encouraging. We had one employee, and it’s funny because the founder told me that this employee was taking advantage of the organization, not showing up to work, not supporting her role. But then when I would step in, the founder would then change her mind. So there’s that part, and then just the micromanaging of the founder. There’s just some real hardcore really adding complexity to the issue. I came in, like I told you, with this full steam ahead. They weren’t quantifying goals. They weren’t even looking at outcomes, outputs, anything. And I was like, well, let’s do this. Let’s quantify stuff. Let’s set up goals. But she would come in afterwards and then question that in front of all the employees behind my back, and then the employees just wouldn’t know what to do. And I went to the board finally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, there is a board?
BENJAMIN: There is a board. I went to the board.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
BENJAMIN: I had been trying so hard. I’ve been trying so hard to be direct. And I remembered one of your podcasts, Muriel, you talked about there was somebody that they were struggling because they kept leaving an organization every time they didn’t feel valued or they didn’t feel like it was novel. I was like, I don’t want to be that person. You talked about being resilient. And I’m like, I’m not going to be that person that is not resilient. I did every, like direct conversations. Finally, I went to the board and their response was, we know. And so now I’m just like, things are just so complex. There’s just this cycle with this founder. I just don’t feel like it’s about the mission anymore. I feel like it’s more about the founder trying to keep the organization the same, not impact more people, and I’m looking to move elsewhere. But it just breaks my heart and I feel like maybe a failure, and I don’t want this to happen again. Now I’m like, job applications everywhere. How do I stop this sort of thing from happening? Is there something wrong with me?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So there’s a lot there, right?
BENJAMIN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I first want to acknowledge what it sounds like is a pretty challenging situation that you find yourself in. You moved to join an organization that seemed like one where you were very aligned with the mission and then you joined, and it’s kind of like The Wizard of Oz. You pull back the curtain and it’s oh-
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: … not quite what I thought it would be. Right?
BENJAMIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think there’s that element. And then there’s the other element that at least in my experience, coaching people who have stepped in and worked with founders, sometimes it can be tricky if those relationships aren’t sort of explicitly, consciously constructed or contracted from the get-go. Really tricky in any situation, and it has to be carefully transitioned. So, I just want to acknowledge just from a baseline standpoint, this isn’t sort of, oh, what do you mean? You’re just dealing with management 101 issues. Okay?
BENJAMIN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want to calibrate. It’s not like I just want to calibrate that you walked into what you thought was a 5K race, and instead you’re running a marathon. Okay? That actually happened to a friend of mine.
BENJAMIN: Oh my gosh.
MURIEL WILKINS: We both went to a race. I was doing the half-marathon. She was doing the 5K, but then she took the wrong turn. She missed a turn and ended up running a whole half-marathon-
BENJAMIN: Oh my gosh.
MURIEL WILKINS: … But she did it. But at-
BENJAMIN: Wow.
MURIEL WILKINS: … Some point she figured out that’s what she was doing. And I think for you, I’m bringing this up because I want you to ground in the reality of it. The reality of it is it’s not a sort of baseline regular management 101 type of thing. Okay? And then the other thing you mentioned is around resilience, and is this a reflection of whether you have the resilience to deal with something like this? There’s a thin line between resilience and just being plain old stubborn. So we want to make sure you’re operating on the right side of things. Okay?
BENJAMIN: That’s great.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So what is it that you want to have happen? What would make you feel like you have some form of positive outcomes for you coming out of this conversation?
BENJAMIN: Man, I just want to learn from this and then come into something else. Maybe be able to find, I would just love a healthy team, how to look for a better fit. Because like you noted, this organization was a great fit for me. It leaned on past experience and a passion of mine with the mission, but it’s just not being heard, and it’s just like, I should have seen it. You feel like you should have seen red flags, like oh, that’s something I got to watch out for, or I need to nip this in the bud. I guess the question is how do you look for a better situation?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I get it. And you mentioned before the feeling a little bit of, well, I don’t know if it’s a little bit, of failure, and how do you keep this from happening? Which inherent in the question of how do you keep this from happening, I hear an assumption in there that you could have kept this from happening.
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I don’t know. Could you have kept this from happening?
BENJAMIN: That’s a hard question. I mean, obviously I’ve learned if there is a founder involved to be very cautious, if not insistent, that they maybe step away for a time. But it just didn’t seem like this was going to be a problem at the beginning because we were so in sync, it seemed. And plus that would’ve been probably seemed inappropriate and offensive at the time to be like, I’ll come in, but you need to leave, or something like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
BENJAMIN: So, I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, you don’t. Exactly. You don’t know. You don’t know. I mean, Benjamin, what’s amazing to me here is you have spent your whole career working with people in the most vulnerable of situations. And if any of those folks came to you and said, “Hey, I should have kept this from happening. I should have kept myself from falling into this situation of poverty or finding myself homeless,” what would you say to them?
BENJAMIN: That is such a great question. Well, I would tell them that yesterday is yesterday, that we didn’t all have a fair shake and that there’s a big opportunity for them to use this in their story moving forward actually as a story of overcoming great challenges, that it can inspire many people like them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. So, a story of overcoming challenges. Now here’s the thing. I’m hearing your side of it. Okay. I don’t have the founder in front of me to be able to say, okay, what’s the deal? What did Benjamin do? Not do? So, I am fully cognizant that there are many, many sides to every situation. And again, I’m not saying there’s a right or a wrong side. I’m saying there are many sides. And so the situation you find yourself in is co-created. It’s like the weather. When we wake up one day and what we’re experiencing now on the West coast and they have all this cold weather and snow and all this stuff, and you’re like, what happened? Well, it’s a combination of factors that just happen to all meet at that particular time that were a long time in the making. Okay?
BENJAMIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, yes, you brought your piece of the weather, she brought hers, both of which were a long time in the making, and now you’re in this situation. Okay? So I’m not absolving anyone from their part of it. Everybody has a part of it. Could you have asked other questions that maybe would’ve given you a clue? Could you have done some other due diligence on this person that maybe could have given you a clue? Could you have not taken that job? Yeah. There’s a lot of could’ve, would’ve, but you didn’t, and you’re here. And so, I think just like you said, you would say to some of the folks that you work with, what is your story going to be? What is the story that you want to write in terms of overcoming this challenge moving forward? So, when I ask you that, what is the story you want to write?
BENJAMIN: Well, one thing I’ve learned is not to idealize how an organization should work, kind of seeing that organizations have a little bit of family in them, especially if they’ve been standing a while. There’s like some baked in relational things that are pretty complex, and I think that I came to this with a framework that didn’t allow for that. So, I would love to learn from that in the future to be able to not come in so much like a wrecking ball of let’s do this. We’re all on the same page. Let’s go out there. Let’s measure the impact. And I would love for that to be a lesson that I could learn to go in and be more of a student of not just how it works, but relationally how things are.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, let’s sort of use this situation as a laboratory for that. What do you think you could have done that would’ve made you more of a student early on to understand not just how the organization works in terms of its delivery model, but also relationally how it operates? What could you have done that’s different than what you did do?
BENJAMIN: Yeah. I think one of the things I could have done is, and this is one I’m seeing from a lot of executive directors, is you get put in and it’s all on you. It’s like you’re a catch-all for all of the to-do lists. And so a lot of times I see we just jump in and I just jumped in and it was about me and my performance, transforming the organization and moving along the calendar. And a lot of that is the board. And even the founder herself was telling me, we need to do this and this and this, but to be able to stop for a second and not be such an individual performer, not be so focused on what I bring in and having really nice board reports. Instead, being like, well, let’s hold on a second, and not just getting to know people on a relational to have a relationship with me-
BENJAMIN: Not just getting to know people on a relational to have a relationship with me, but also examining how they interact with each other and just kind of get a feeling. I would love to learn that skill to see how they mesh together so I can respect it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Well, I love that you used the word student. And so when you think about what makes an effective student, what is it that enables somebody to be an effective student? What skills are they using?
BENJAMIN: Wow, that’s great. I think there has to be a sense of humility. There’s something to learn because you’re actually trying to learn and you’re trying to study and listen and just have a sense of anticipation that there is something to be learned, and that’s kind of the opposite of the individual performer like I’m going to get these numbers and I’m going to blow the socks of the board. The board even criticized me. They said, “There’s nothing in your board report that’s vulnerable. Where’s the section of how you’re struggling?” I’m like, I didn’t think I was supposed to tell you guys where I was struggling.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, look, I think you hit the nail in the head. It’s actually a balance. If you think about someone being an effective student, I have kids who are in school, and well, what does it mean? They do need to do the work? It’s not like you have homework, so it’s not like, oh, no work. You have to do the work which it sounds like you were great at that. You jumped right in to do the work. But then there’s this piece of you’re also there to learn something. As you said, there’s an anticipation to learn, which means that I actually believe I have something to learn. If you don’t believe you have something to learn, you have left the station of being a student a long time ago. And how do you learn? You learn by doing, and you learn also by listening and by asking questions. So, to your charge for yourself around how can I come in as a leader and both deliver and be a student so that I can pick up on the relational aspects and the delivery aspects… I don’t know. You tell me. How much time did you spend listening and asking questions when you first came on board?
BENJAMIN: You know, it was from a different perspective. It was more like how can I personally form a relationship with people rather than how these things worked. And I came in with a bias because I came in and they hadn’t been very effective in a lot of areas, so I’m realizing that I assumed that they kind of weren’t as good at their job or something, you know what I mean? I assumed that there were some inherent problems. And so now that you’re talking, it’s helping me see that I automatically assumed that it wasn’t going to be helpful to study their relationships or how they were doing things because obviously they weren’t doing it really, really well, and so let’s just move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: A big part of what happens in coaching is self-reflection. You get an increased sense of self-awareness, which is critical before anyone can move to action. While Benjamin was eager to get some tips on how to deal with the issues he’s facing, it was important that he see what his contribution has been to the situation. His ability and willingness to take a hard look at his own behaviors, set the stage for a more a productive coaching session. He finds himself in a situation that many people face at one time or another throughout their career, the experience of taking a job, feeling like it’s the perfect fit and having things go a different way. Benjamin came into the role with a lot of expectations, looking to show that he could do a great job in this leadership position and move the organization in a certain direction. His frustration at things not going the way he had envisioned is understandable, but it’s also holding him hostage. By turning the focus on what he can do differently moving forward, it would allow him to regain some of his footing. Let’s jump back in as I ask BENJAMIN how he can leverage his past experiences to strengthen how he approaches his leadership today, especially as it pertains to his team. To me, what’s coming up as you’re talking Benjamin is like, I think that there’s such a comparison to the direct impact work that you’ve done as a humanitarian. And you mentioned that you’ve worked with people in recovery. And so when you work with people in recovery or you work with people in, again, very vulnerable situations, survival situation from a humanitarian standpoint, what is the mindset that you go in with in order to really be able to support them?
BENJAMIN: That is a great comparison because you definitely would not go in thinking, well, obviously what you’ve done in the past hasn’t worked so we’re just going to plow through your recovery. And I personally don’t have that perspective about someone in recovery. I have the utmost respect for their bravery, and it’s a cycle. It’s not always linear, their progress. But I even come to that since with my own employees or the people I worked with. It was not respectful of the efforts they had in the past, so that is really a great insight.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you came in, let’s say it’s day one here or day one at your next place, and you approach it from what seems to be a pretty authentic leadership approach that you have, you’ve just applied it in one area and not so much in another, what would be the difference in terms of how you approach your employees?
BENJAMIN: Well, I would be curious about their own goals and their own frustrations and their own, what’s worked well for them in the past, what’s not working so well? I would just be more of a student of how they felt in the organization, how their relationships were, and yeah, to build that community and not be so hyper focused on performance and on things that seem impressive on a balance sheet or on a P&L.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Again, it is a balance. Yes, you want to do all that and at some point you need to deliver as well. Okay. And I’m curious, what is it that you feel, because you mentioned it a few times, this you were very driven to perform to show the value. What is it that drove you to lean on that side of it more, that bias that you said, versus the let me also learn and meet folks where they are?
BENJAMIN: To be honest, a lot of it was just that this was, like I said, one of the biggest leadership roles I’ve had. And I did have people even in my own family that were doubtful that I could handle such a large role overseeing so many things, and then even just showing kind of like an ROI for my wife and my kids. I moved them. It’s funny. I just really needed it to work and I really needed to be able to show something for it, and now it’s not working, but. But it’s like, I just wanted to prove that I could do it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, you wanted to prove that you could do it, which I don’t think if we go back to the beginning of our conversation, proving that you could do this doesn’t sound to me that was the mission you were drawn to, and yet that’s what you made your mission.
BENJAMIN: So true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I think there’s this question here around moving forward, being really clear about what your mission is and then staying aligned to that. And by the way, look, sometimes your mission is going to be I need to prove that I can do this. I need to prove to myself that I can present something or run a race or whatever it is. Okay, fine. Then align your actions with that. But when there’s dissonance when you’re saying, “Hey, here’s the mission I’m here to serve,” but really there’s this whole other mission that you’re serving, things don’t add up.
BENJAMIN: Yeah, I can definitely see that. It definitely started with a narrative of it’s kind of like that hero’s journey versus what the real mission that drew me out here was which was to help people. And I can see how those can distract one from the other, and so I don’t want to go into another place like a wrecking ball with it all being about what I can accomplish.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’re still at your current organization, right?
BENJAMIN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I think there’s a bit of like for the time that you have there, how can you make it work for you? Because have you decided definitely, definitely you’re leaving?
BENJAMIN: I’m maybe 70% on leaving, but I’m not a hundred percent, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, okay. And I’m neither here nor there. It’s whatever you want at this point in terms of what that looks like. But for the time being for today, you’re there until you get to a hundred percent that you’re leaving or you get to a hundred percent that you’re staying, that decision will come one day. So my question to you is while you’re there, what would it look like for you to lead in a way that is fully aligned to the mission that you originally came with in spite of this founder that you’re dealing with?
BENJAMIN: Well, it would make it less about how frustrated I am and make sense now why I’m just completely frustrated about not being able to achieve goals. Because in my heart it has been about me achieving goals, and it would be more about how do I learn from the people I work with about how it’s going for them. Just really focus on the mission while still trying to get help somehow and accomplishing these goals that have gotten very, very complex.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, at a tactical level, at a concrete level, what would that look like for you tomorrow if you went in with that mindset?
BENJAMIN: Well, it would look like spending time with the people I work with beyond the founder and beyond the program director, and just, I know this isn’t concrete, but falling in love again with what we get to do, and just really focusing on the mission standpoint of how we’re doing, spending more time with the people that we serve, probably bringing that mindset going forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: And Benjamin, that doesn’t mean that you need to be in denial around the reality of the founder. That’s not what I’m suggesting at all. This is not like, oh, just use positive thinking and think about the good stuff and forget the bad stuff. That’s not what this is at all. This is about finding your anchor during the storm. You are there right now. And so why are you there right now? What is going to be your purpose during this very difficult time? What is going to hold you there in a way that doesn’t suck you up in this feeling of frustration that you’ve had? Where can you find your calm? Because it’s clear you have found the frustration, right?
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think our… we’re at a place of, where do you find your calm? Where do you find the part that’s going to continue to drive you? It’s almost like coming back to home base. What’s your home base?
BENJAMIN: That’s so good.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it sounds like it’s something that’s been a common thread for you your whole profession, which is helping people. And now it’s not just helping people in terms of the folks that you serve, but also helping people within your organization, your employees, your teams, et cetera, wherever you might be able to.
BENJAMIN: That’s great, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Again, not ignoring the founder piece, but I think it’s important to get some grounding and everything else before addressing the founder piece because that’s already consumed a lot of your energy.
BENJAMIN: Yes. No, I think that would be life giving to reconnect with the mission and also if I am supposed to go somewhere else, that I would be able to have that singularity of purpose of mind of mission and just focus on that. Because I’m sure that even though this is a unique situation with the founder, there are frustrations everywhere and no organization is free of that, and there’s always a limit to what we can do.
MURIEL WILKINS: That is a truth. That is a truth. You’re absolutely right. There are going to be challenges everywhere. That’s life and that is organizational life. Okay? The challenges are not going to disappear. The question is how you respond to them. Now, will some challenges be more exacerbated than others? Absolutely. And it sounds like you have found yourself in one that’s like deeply exacerbated. But you have a choice. You have a choice to deal with it, learn from it, stick with it, or you have a choice to go. You know? What my sense is your frustration as it relates to the founder, which I think now we need to hone in on, has been that you haven’t been able to change the way the founder behaves.
BENJAMIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: But inherent in that is an assumption that you can change the way the founder behaves.
BENJAMIN: Yeah, and it’s funny you mention that because one of my board members, she’s amazing. She has always given me leadership books to listen to, audiobooks, and when I bring these issues to her, and even in a group setting with other board members, she just says, “Oh, you’ll figure it out.” All these leadership books are like, “How do you best change someone’s behavior, change someone’s mind?” Or it’s almost like how do you wear a certain color that causes them to… And I’m like, “Look, I’m looking for support here and I’m not looking for how to manipulate them. I’m trying to raise this red flag, help.” And they’re just like, “I’m sure you’ll figure it out.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Benjamin, that’s why there is so many of those books. It’s like how do you lose 50 pounds in three days? Everybody buys that book and multiple copies because it never works. I mean, here’s the thing, can you truly change the other? No, you cannot. You can influence the other, there’s no guarantee. Change assumes that you can actually completely change them. Very, very hard to do because it’s out of your control. The one thing that’s in your control is you. And so what’s in your control in this situation vis-à-vis the founder?
BENJAMIN: I just try to be honest. I can share, I can talk. It does feel kind of like a waste of time. She is not very confrontational, so she shuts down and makes it like, “Oh, I didn’t mean that.” And I’ve even showed her the conversation, and I’m like, “But that’s exactly what you said.” And she’ll come in and change, make just some HR decision or something.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. But what’s interesting here though, Benjamin, is if we take it back a couple of steps, okay, is at what point, if any, did you and the founder contract around what is your role and what is her role? What are the decision rights? What are the things that you’re accountable for and that she’s accountable for? What are the things that you need her approval on and don’t need her approval on, that she needs to weigh in on or doesn’t need to weigh in on? At what point did that conversation or series of conversations happen?
BENJAMIN: That’s a great question. So yeah, we have had those conversations many times. So we’ve written it out, we’ve talked about it, and then she’ll jump in. And so then when I confront her about it, she gets defensive. And it’s even gotten to the point sometimes, it’s almost like clockwork, where I’m like, “I think we should go to the board and we can ask for a just renewed job description for me.” And all of a sudden, “Oh no, I should just step back.” She doesn’t want to go to the board with it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, look, I think in the same way that this was a big leap for you in the way that you perceived it, of going from middle management to now the leader, as executive director, this is a big leap for her, as having been the founder and executive director for I don’t know how long, and now having to change roles. So again, she’s not here with us, I’m not coaching her, but my sense is probably she reverts back to what she knows versus fully stepping into whatever it is, her new role is solely as founder. So I can understand why that can be a challenge. What’s unclear is does she have the commitment, the self-commitment and wherewithal to let go of some of the things that previously were hers? And only time will tell, only time will tell. Again, she’s not here with us. So given that, the question becomes for you, what are you willing to be okay with and for how long?
BENJAMIN: Yeah, that really is the question. I’ve actually done a lot of counseling for people and there’s something we always go back to, which is hope. And I really had a lot of hope. I’ve realized that I can keep going until it feels like the wheels will fall off. But I ask myself, “Do I want to? Do I want to do that?”
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think that’s the key question here. I think the question right now is, what is it that you want? Okay? Not, “How do I wish other people would act?” What is it that you want? And there is no magical answer. I don’t have a right or wrong answer to offer you, I don’t have this manual that I can look at and say, “Hey, Benjamin, you know what? Give it three more days and if it doesn’t get any better, you need to go.” Or, “Benjamin, you know what? I think you should stick around for another three months because there’s a lot of growth here.” It really all depends on what is it that you want. In order to decide what to do, you have to define what it is that you want, and it has to be grounded in the reality of what’s happening. I’m all for hope and keeping hope alive, but your decision needs to be grounded in the reality of what’s happening. So far in this coaching session, we’ve gotten a really clear sense of the problem and the struggles that Benjamin is facing. A common theme for him, as well as many of my other coaching clients, is that we can’t really control what other people do. It’s important that Benjamin defines what he wants and to keep that in mind as he takes action. That could be deciding that his wellbeing is important above all else and so the job just isn’t for him, or it could be that he wants to stick with it for X number of years to learn all he can. Whatever that motivation is, it’s important to define it to help him move forward. Let’s dive back in, as Benjamin walks through articulating what he wants and how he might get there.
BENJAMIN: It’s interesting that you talk about what I want. In my religious background, there’s this concept of calling which has always come up. It’s almost like, I don’t know, read the tea leaves or something. And this is one of the first times in my life I’m like, “It really is solely based on what I want.” And so isn’t that weird that that would be a hard question to answer? And I don’t expect you to tell me what I want, Muriel, don’t worry about that. But how do you figure out what you want?
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, right. I mean, look, I’m still trying to figure out what I want. That’s a day-to-day decision for me. But you said, “Isn’t it weird?” I don’t think there’s anything weird about it, it just is. And I think based on what you just said, where you tend to operate more around my understanding of a calling, which is you are called to do something, it’s a response to something, something out there.
BENJAMIN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think this question of “what do I want” is still a calling. It’s just a response to your own self.
BENJAMIN: Wow, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Rather than something out there, it’s a response to something in you rather than something out there. So the model is not any different, it’s just where the calling is coming from.
BENJAMIN: Wow, that’s really good.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, I think you’re at a place right now of discerning what is your own calling.
BENJAMIN: Mm-hmm, that’s good. That’ll be new for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, it’s what we call intuition. Listening to your gut, okay? And at some point, I mean, I’m not a hugely religious person, but I know enough. At some point, where the magic really happens, is when the inner calling matches the external calling.
BENJAMIN: That’s good, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: One is not better than the other. And I think we’re also getting rid of this myth that career progression and career advancement is linear. It’s not, that’s not how growth happens. Advancement and growth are not the same thing. And so I think what you’re going through right now is a period of growth. It just tends to be a period of growth that is more of a zigzag and maybe some backsliding rather than, Oh, I got here and I conquered it all and I did it, and that’s just going to move me to the next step. Instead, it’s saying, Oh, what it’s highlighting are things that are not yet learned. The question for you is, is this place, what we talked about, being a student, being able to ask questions, being able to listen, being able to meet the board, the employees, everybody where they are, being able to stay anchored in the mission. Those are all learning opportunities. I think the question is, is this organization, given what’s happening with the founder, at what point does it become a place where it’s not productive for learning for you, productive for growth for you? You have to make that determination. Everybody has different thresholds.
BENJAMIN: Yeah. And another aspect being at what point does my learning or trying to learn how to deal with it the best for the organization in terms of meeting its needs?
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right, that’s absolutely right. I mean, that’s very wise of you, Benjamin, because when faced with a challenge and that challenge is not met in the most effective way, something gives, either the individual, the leader facing the challenge or the organization. And at the worst extent, both get compromised, both face negative consequences. So I think to bring it back to the founder situation, because I’m clearly not giving you any type of direct answer, but a lot of questions, I think the thing I would be curious about is what do you feel is in your control vis-à-vis the founder for the time that remains while you’re at this organization? Let’s assume you’re there for another six months to a year. What is in your control vis-à-vis your relationship with the founder?
BENJAMIN: Yeah. I think that, in reality, what I can do is input some of that learning because it’s apparent to me that she’s not really cognizant or not maybe she shouldn’t really realize how it affects the mission when we compromise on some of these things. I can be that, maybe a lifeline for her, try to just kindly be understanding towards her, like you mentioned, the fact that this is new for her. At the same time, I just really need to do an assessment of, there’s obviously some things I need to learn, there’s some things that aren’t working, and is the organization going to limp along while I try to figure these out or learn these things? Or do I need to help them put someone else in place and just allow the founder to continue being the founder until they’re really ready for an executive director. Because if really she’s not ready to move on, the board’s not ready to have that happen, I don’t think that I should be getting an executive director’s salary there when they already basically have an executive director that’s got a very clear vision.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, yeah. And so that’s an assessment that you have to make. That’s a very mature assessment, to be able to say, “Hey, I know you want me here, I don’t think you guys are ready for me. So, let’s figure out how we take it from here.”
BENJAMIN: Yeah, set it up for success, because I really do love the mission, I love the organization so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you mentioned around helping her meet the mission, helping the founder meet the mission. Do you sense that the two of you have alignment on the mission? Is she as passionate about the mission as you are?
BENJAMIN: She’s definitely passionate. There are some different nuances that end up being big things. And so there is a difference. She’s just kind of like, Hey, let’s keep things like they are, and everyone’s just fine. And I’m more like, All these people are coming in with real problems and let’s help them get to where they want to go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so I mean, that sounds like it’s not necessarily a difference in mission, but more like a difference in strategy. How do you implement the mission, right?
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And this is a learning for you both where you are, but also wherever you go in the future. Yeah, if you’re going to lead an organization and you have a board to report to, you have a founder that it sounds like you are reporting to the founder to a certain extent, there has to be alignment around the strategy.
BENJAMIN: You’re right, we’re divided on strategy, but that’s a problem. And now that you mention it, it’s like that’s something I hadn’t considered. I was thinking of the vision, long-term vision. We like the general notion of helping people, but the strategies are completely different.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And so here’s the thing though, you might have…
BENJAMIN: … completely different.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And so here’s the thing though, you might have an articulation of the vision and there’s an agreement there, so it’s the vision. Then when you get into, okay, how are we actually going to execute on that vision, which is the strategy. And so, this lack of alignment in strategy is what’s then trickling down to differences in approach. So part of it is you can spend your time in the muckety-muck of you and the founder have very different styles, and we’re going to argue about whether we should be using this font or that font in a report. You’ve got bigger issues here.
BENJAMIN: That’s so true.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s just that the difference in, “Should we use this font or that font,” is easier to grasp, but you’ve got way bigger issues as the leader.
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You guys are arguing over the breadcrumbs on the floor versus what kind of nutrition do we even want to be having, like what does the meal need to look like.
BENJAMIN: That is really good insight because yeah, now that you mention it, that is the wall that we’ve been hitting. As I look at it, whenever we have some sort of clash or something, it is strategic. I think that we’re on different pages. I think that there’s the vision, and we both believe in the model, but there is this question of what is our strategy to get people where they need to go, and that’s where the conflict comes in. But there’s a false alignment, there’s a false consensus. You know what I mean?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. There is no alignment because it sounds like the word that you all are actually focused on is “agreement.” Agreement and alignment are two different things.
BENJAMIN: Wow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Consensus and agreement are two different things. Alignment and consensus is, Even if this is not my top choice in terms of how we do things, I can live with it. I understand it and I can live with it, and I’m going to commit to following through on it.” Agreement is, This is it. This is my choice. This is what I’m doing.” Maybe the place now is, as you as the leader, is to reframe it to alignment. How can we get alignment around this? How do we align? It’s like when you drive a car, you can feel when your wheels are out of alignment. The car still drives, but they’re out of alignment. So it’s how do we just get everybody moving in the right direction? You have to have some conversation around what would a strategy look like that we could all be comfortable with, okay with, even if it’s not our first choice in strategy.
BENJAMIN: That’s really good. Yeah, I can see that, because I think that that is kind of immature thinking that we’ve been all dealing with, an organization is that we all have to be in complete agreement. When in reality, in order to even function as a whole as an organization, we actually need to be in alignment, and we’re not always going to agree but we need to align on a strategy.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right, that’s right. And that is the role of an executive director. That is the role of any leader, and again, exacerbated by the pieces around the founder. But I’m going to tell you, regardless of style, personality style, if the executive director and the founder and the board and then the employees are not aligned around strategy, it’s going to be a challenge either way. But there’s a difference between pushing for it, Benjamin, and aligning people. Again, going back to the example of a car. I can’t push my wheel into alignment. The little that I know about car mechanics, I don’t think I can literally push … At least I don’t have the strength to do it, and it probably wouldn’t work out for the best in the long-run. But there’s a process that needs to go through, whether the wheels are balanced, they’re tweaked one at a time. Somebody who’s an expert in doing that does it. They make sure they’re … So, it’s much more nuanced. There’s no pushing here, there’s no pushing of an agenda. Again, I’m talking semantics but it’s the intention of alignment, which is are we all facing the right direction? The same direction, not even the right direction, are we all facing the same direction? Are we all going at the same pace? Are we checking each other as we’re going? And you’re the one who is trying to orchestrate that, but the place to start is to reframe it, and I think to even gauge whether there’s an appetite to do that.
BENJAMIN: Gotcha. Yeah, I love that. I love that. So, it’s not pushing, it’s not just, “Hey, we do …” That’s aligned. And I think that goes back to what you counseled me earlier of learning, coming in learning first. I should have been able to … Well, you say should have. We say something up here, “We should not should on ourselves.” But it’s like, I should’ve been able to tell that there were differences in strategy and I should’ve had the wherewithal, but of course, it was my first time in a role like this, to be like, “Is there a strategic plan, and what’s the process and how much of a role does the executive director play in that?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, right. I mean, no, there is no should as you said, because you didn’t know. You didn’t know, you didn’t know. Now you know. So, to your question earlier on, “How do I keep this from happening the next time,” because it’s happened, so why think about how you could have kept it happening this time, but the next time it’s not even a guarantee that you keep it from happening. You just now have a better sense of what questions to ask and what to look for that is going to support the role that you want to play in that organization.
BENJAMIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. We’ve covered quite a bit, and I know we went over and beyond the founder, and that’s purposeful. I think you have a life over and beyond the founder at this org. Not to say you should ignore the founder, don’t ignore the founder. And there’s life beyond the founder in terms of what your job is there. So I would just love to hear from you, A, what’s different for you now relative to when we first started our coaching session? And then B, what are your top one or two takeaways coming out of this discussion?
BENJAMIN: Yeah, I think what’s different for me now is … Man, there’s so much. I think the alignment versus agreement thing, being much more concerned with just coming into it with a picture of what the strategy is or to be a student. I want to be a student. A student of relationship, I want to be a student of strategy, and also just that whole process of strategic planning. And then not to push things but to frame things and look for alignment, rather than trying to maybe force things. And then just treating employees like I would treat the people that we help. Treating people in the organization with a sense of empathy and understanding their relationships and how they interweave to best set them up for success, rather than just focusing on my own performance and being that individual performer and that super boss or whatever. My mission is not to prove that I can do it, my mission is to help others, and that’s what I set out to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Beautiful, beautiful. I mean, I think if you could write that down and look at that every day, it’ll help you get through until you know what’s next for you.
BENJAMIN: That’s great.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Thank you, Benjamin.
BENJAMIN: Thank you, Muriel.
MURIEL WILKINS: What we know about leadership is that there is always, always going to be complexity. You’re never really just facing one issue at once. In Benjamin’s case, he came to the coaching session really wanting to tackle the issue he was having with the founder of the company, how he could avoid a similar situation in the future, which is a fine place to start and a good goal to have. But as we know, we can’t always fully know all the variables around a new role or the people we’ll be working with until we’re in it. And when we see things more clearly, the best thing we can do is try to understand why things are the way they are. Not to change the past, but rather to inform how to move forward. For Benjamin, there are a few things he can focus on going forward that apply in a lot of other leadership situations. One, it’s about remembering his mission and why he’s there. Two, it’s about narrowing down that mission to the specific purpose or reasons why he might stay in this job and for how long. There is something to gain from the situation, even if it doesn’t last much longer. And to that end, he can use this as an opportunity to flex skills that he’ll need at any organization. How to find strategic alignment, how to set a course, and how to influence but not control how others act on the company’s goals. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: There are some goals that we have as a team that cannot be accomplished in a single year. They’re going to take years of effort and work. They’re also going to take multiple collaborators. Our team cannot do it alone, so we’re relying on so many partnerships and collaborations.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of this episode? Join the Coaching Real Leaders Community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave and review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: Should I Continue to Climb the Corporate Ladder?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Carmen to protect her confidentiality. She cares about achieving success in her career and about the culture in which she works.
CARMEN: I’ve tried to maximize my impact, look for the roles where I feel like I can be the most successful and advance the most, while also having a really positive impact on the company that I’m with. I need to be strongly connected to the mission of my organization. When I think about the places that I’ve done my best work and I’ve felt the most engaged, I have that kind of dynamic duo of a place with a mission that I really believe in, and a team and a group of people and a culture that is one where I can really be myself, where you really feel like everyone has your back, you get to do the work that is mostly uniquely suited to your skillset and people are open and happy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Carmen has always been a high achiever, from her time in school and throughout her career so far.
CARMEN: I feel like every sort of step of the way I’ve done the predictable thing or kind of the right path, right? I’ve gotten the promotion on the right timelines. I’ve moved up. I’ve continued to kind of take on increasing levels of responsibility, increasing spans of control in an organization and kind of moving up the ladder, if you will. I would say I have always been a high performer most of my life and my career, from a young age encouraged to always get straight A’s, to always go to the best school, get the best degree. And I’m in a very interesting place now, because I feel like that has been so core to me and I’m starting to feel like it’s shaking up a bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: Carmen reached out because something seems off to her. While she feels she should pursue the next level at her organization, she’s also hesitating. And she’s not quite sure why. So I started the coaching conversation by asking her to share more of what she feels at this present moment.
CARMEN: I think during the pandemic, just pretty much every other company, we went through a lot of period of stress and a lot of very intense looking at our work saying, “Oh my God, we have to completely redo how we think of things, how we’re doing things.” Everyone was working incredibly long hours. And then, we got to the point, it didn’t feel good, around layoffs and consolidation of work, and then we found ourselves doing even more with less.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And when I took stock in there, I really saw all of the signs of burnout. And I felt just completely overwhelmed and that I couldn’t keep going and I needed to pull back. So I sort of did some of the things that I felt I had to do around drawing boundaries about what I was able to bring to the job. And they weren’t successful, quite frankly. I found that I got a lot of lip service about taking time that I need, but when it came to peer support and kind of the culture of the organization, it wasn’t there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And I felt there were probably a number of missteps I made and didn’t feel like I came out of that supported, successful, or still on that kind of promotion track that I wanted to be in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And then, as I’ve just been kind of looking around the company, I see a lot of behavior rewarded that doesn’t really align with my values. So while on a day-to-day, I can be happy, it’s increasingly feeling like a place that’s going to be really tough for me to stay on this kind of promotion track. So I’ve sort of gotten to a place where I feel like I need to make a decision. Do I sort of pick myself back up and get back on this promotion track, which really does feel like pushing me again toward a place where we might be approaching burnout, where I really need to give a lot of myself to a company that I’m not as enamored with as I once was. Or should I sort of break with what I’ve done my whole life and say, “Now is the time to prioritize my work-life balance. Now is the time for me to sort of step back, remain highly competent, a solid performer, but maybe not trying to just keep moving up this ladder.” And so, I’m here, one, to think through what does framing up that decision look like for me? And regardless of which path I choose, how do I best set up myself for success? If I’m targeting a promotion track, how do I avoid burnout this time? How do I reset after some misses? But then, on the other hand, if I do try to take a step back, we live in a world where that gets described as quiet quitting.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: Right? How do I do that in a way that feels respectful, that resets expectations with my boss, and doesn’t make it feel like I’m over here trying to coast on the back of others?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. I understand, I think.
CARMEN: Yeah. Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m hearing is up until a couple years ago, the predictable path was pretty predictable in terms of the results of it, right?
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You did X, Y, Z, and lo and behold, the output was as expected, X, Y, Z, usually in terms of promotion, self-satisfaction from a work standpoint, et cetera. And then, things changed, right? Circumstances changed.
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: It wasn’t as predictable anymore, and the way you experienced that is starting to feel burnout. So you made some changes, created some boundaries, and lo and behold, the result of that is that it seemed like it wasn’t as well-received as maybe you had expected it to be.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so now you’re trying to decide, “Do I continue or get back on this track that I was on before, which is gunning for the promotion, gunning for the advancement,” knowing that what comes with it or thinking that what comes with it is basically throwing away the boundaries that you set. Or do you maintain the boundaries, but your thinking is that means taking a step back from the career path. And if you do that, how will that be perceived?
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, a couple of questions. I’m curious how you experienced burnout. How did you know that you were headed down that way?
CARMEN: I started to disengage from the work, just sort of look at my list and go, “I don’t want to do any of these things. Not one of these things is motivating to me.” And then, I also felt myself not being able to show up at the meetings and spaces where I needed to be present as the version of myself I wanted to present. And that was usually because I was under-prepare, thinking of something else, and needed the work to be moving faster, so showed up impatient and showed up under-prepared and trying to move things faster than was probably appropriate. And as a result, I was turning off my computer at night not feeling good about the day. And that sort of entered me into this spiral of feeling like, “I don’t enjoy this work. I’m dreading every day that I sit down five feet from my bed and have to log on. And I’m not feeling the connection with my peers that I used to have.” And just feeling, like I said, a complete lack of motivation to do a lot of the work that used to excite me and bring me joy. I take joy in challenge and succeeding at challenges, and I wasn’t finding that anymore.
MURIEL WILKINS: And at any point, or even now, were you able to pinpoint what was driving the disengagement or the lack of motivation?
CARMEN: I think some of it was the quantity of the work. Some of it was the support from my manager that was not present. And some of it was the interaction with a few specific peers that was particularly strained and difficult.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, all three of those variables, the quantity of the work, increased quantity of work I’m assuming.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Lack of management support, and then difficult interactions with peers. Were these all variables that did not exist all along this path?
CARMEN: Correct. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You had never faced those?
CARMEN: Probably I had a lot of work. I think I’ve always had lot of work on my plate, but it has felt achievable. I’ve prided myself on being able to just produce a lot of output and being able to manage a lot. And at some point, it got to be too much. And then, these other things kind of exacerbated it. But specifically, when we had layoffs, I had a lot of work added to my plate from people who were laid off.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, when you then decided, “You know what? I’m going to take care of myself during this by creating some boundaries.” Can you just share with me what that looked like? What were some of the types of boundaries that you put up?
CARMEN: Most of them were time-related.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
CARMEN: They were, “I’m only going to work past 6:00 PM one night a week, and I’m not going to work more than two hours on the weekends,” which I felt was reasonable. I felt like I saw other people in the organization put those types of boundaries up, and I should be doing that as well. So that was probably the biggest one. I think there were other pieces around how I prioritized work that said, “There’s just some work that I’m not going to be able to get to. It simultaneously is not the most important work, and it’s work that’s not bringing me joy.” And so, that was a little bit of the other boundary I put up, but I don’t think I put that up as firmly as some of the time boundaries.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then, what happened?
CARMEN: I felt like when certain work that was left when I either was struggling to get it completed or when I needed help, that I didn’t have a lot of the peer support there. The expectation was, “You should have done whatever it took to get this done.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
CARMEN: Or continued to work on that same level that I had been working at. And I think that it was more of just a complete lack of support or understanding that that was what these boundaries meant for me, was that certain things just weren’t going to get done and that needed to be okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I’m hearing you say that it was like those boundaries were not important, that you should have gotten it done no matter what. Was that explicitly said or is that what you think was said?
CARMEN: It was not, but it was evident in some of the feedback I received, that there were sort of veiled ways of saying that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And so, the expectation you think was what?
CARMEN: I think the expectation was that I continued to do that work and shoulder that work, and that if other people… It kind of feels like our company has sort of two mindsets, really sort of framed like this. There are the people who show up just before 9:00 and they leave right after 5:00. There are those people, and then there are the people who you get emails from them at 1:00 in the morning, you get emails from them over the weekends. And so, it was sort of this sense of, “You should be in that second camp.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And if you’re in that second camp, maybe am I getting the camps confused. So many camps. If you’re on the camp who answers the emails at 1:00 AM in the morning.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
CARMEN: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: What does that mean in your company?
CARMEN: That’s sort of what I’m seeing. It doesn’t really mean anything. Those people are not more likely to get promoted; it just means that they work more. And I think that’s one of the things I noticed, was there’s not this connection between how much you work and whether or not you get promoted. I think you probably don’t move up the ladder unless you do that, but doing that also doesn’t guarantee that you’re being seen as a top contributor and getting recognized as such. And I think that was also one of the pieces for me, is I wasn’t feeling like I was getting recognition for a lot of the things I was doing and how much of myself I was giving. And so, I said, “These are the things that when I look at the situation, I think are definitely needed, that it’s very clear that this part of the work is very impactful and is needed by other teams, and needed to do their work. And this right here, this tranche, maybe a couple of people think it’s important. And in the past, just because they wanted it done, I would’ve done it. But now, no. Just because two or three people say, ‘I need it,’ and it doesn’t to me feel like there’s a larger purpose for the work, I need to cut that type of work out.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. I just want to take a bit of a step back, right, because what I’m recognizing also is that you were also very predictable.
CARMEN: Yes, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what you just said. “If somebody needed something done, I did it, no questions asked. It didn’t matter whether it was on the high value priority list or not, I got it done.”
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because you are the high performer who always got the A.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: No matter whether it was advanced chemistry or PE. And I’m not saying which one is more important than the other. Right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you sort of broke the predictability pattern, too.
CARMEN: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: And yet maybe, I don’t know, maybe a little assumed that they would respond in the predictable way, which is, “Hey, Carmen. Great job. You’re such a trooper.” But they didn’t. They responded according, again, not saying it’s right or wrong or it’s okay or not okay, but they responded in a different way.
CARMEN: Mm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you responded in a different way. So there’s a lot of unpredictability all around.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you mentioned, “Why would I continue to do this if I’m not getting recognized, if I’m feeling burned out, if I’m just so…” That’s a great question. Why would you?
CARMEN: If I think about the company as a whole, there’s still a lot that I really like. I like the products that I work with. I like quite a few of the teammates that I have. And there’s a lot about my workplace that’s quite pleasant and that is enjoyable. And so, for me, it’s about reframing myself in that to say, “I thought I was part of a group that was kind of considered the elite performers and that were moving up the ladder to lead this company.” And now sort of shifting that, “Do all of these other things still hold true?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: So, I still do a lot. I think a lot of what we do as a company is good, is positive, and gives me pride in what we do. And it’s still a good place to work. I think I still would, if I were on the outside looking in, would still pursue a career here.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: I just often wonder if I were to start over again, how I would approach it differently? It kind of feels like I did all of those things you’re supposed to do in your first 90 days of kind of overachieving and setting your reputation. And I never stopped doing those. I just kept doing those, and I feel like no matter what, there are a lot of reasons to stay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: I enjoy my job, I enjoy the work, I enjoy my team. And if I do stay, then it’s just about making sure that I don’t end up in some crazy spiral where I’m back on the burnout train. And how do I reframe it and rethink my years here to say, “What would these have looked like or what can they look like in the future, where I still feel the joys of success, the joys of contributing, and feeling like I am making a difference here without making it feel like the only way to do that is at a personal expense or at the cost of breaking boundaries that I’ve think I’ve set in good faith and for a very good reason.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So far in this conversation, we’ve been looking at the specific ways that Carmen has felt burnt out. As someone who’s always checked the boxes, so to speak, always moved ahead in her career, she’s now struggling with whether that’s the track she wants to be on. Carmen is clear on what makes her feel fulfilled in a job, and she also is able to acknowledge her longstanding need for achievement. But these two things seem at odds with each other for Carmen. So I was curious about how she defines success for herself.
CARMEN: I think in the past, I would’ve told you a promotion.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
CARMEN: And I think I probably need to go through that exercise of saying, “If you take that out of equation, what does it look like to succeed in my day-to-day work?” And I do wonder if I am in the right role in the organization for me to feel that way. I think if promotion is off the table, I wonder if the day-to-day work that I do and just kind of succeeding at that every day is enough for me to feel fulfilled or this is a job I want to have.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a bit of hedging that I’m sensing here, in that you’re sort of trying to paint the picture of, “If I make believe that promotion is out of the equation,” right?
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: “What would it look like? And would that make me feel okay?”
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I’m going to suggest that we start with is your definition of success promotion? And it’s okay if it is, it’s okay if it isn’t. I just think we need to nail that to sort of understand whether how you’re defining your success moving forward is the same as how you’ve defined it up until now, which as you said, up until now or up until recently, the way you were defining success was advancement and promotion.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, now going forward for whatever, X period of time, is that the success metric or is the success metric different?
CARMEN: Yeah. And I think that’s hard for me, because I’ve always been in a role where every two to three years there is the promotion, sometimes even less. And I think early on in my career, one of my resume bullet points was “successively promoted three times in three years.” And so, I think that that for me, in every workplace I’ve been in has been the marker, the badge, the indicator. There was no sign of good performance without that conversation of what a promotion is. And so, up until the position I was in before I came to this company, that for me was the definition. So now I’ve been here, and because of layoffs, my work has expanded, but there was never that title change. And for me, that external sense, not external to outside of the company, but within the company, external to me or to my team, that badge that said, “Yep. We believe in Carmen. We believe that she’s doing the job well and that that’s the right marker.” And so, I think for me, some of that is thinking through, “What’s that intrinsic definition? And what can I be satisfied with without that kind of supplemental thing.”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s exactly it. Because I think what you’re basically saying is, “If getting the A is not a possibility, I don’t know if I can be motivated.” And what I’m saying is, “So what if grades were off the table?” They might be, they might not be. I don’t know. Right? But what if you had gone to school where there were no grades? You were there for other reasons, right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would’ve kept you motivated to work as hard as you did that did get you the A?
CARMEN: It’s so funny, my business school had grade nondisclosure. And so, I think even when I worked in the alumni group to talk about why that was so important to us, it was because it meant that you could just do so much more and be so much more exploratory. So for me, that meant really doing more. I started two businesses when I was in business school, because I had that freedom and I didn’t have to worry. And I never knew if I was going to get an A or a C. You showed up to class, you did the classwork, you learned as was appropriately motivated. You did the work up to what you felt was your standard, but then you had all this freedom. And so, I think to me, that even speaks more about why for me, the work-life balance then becomes so much more important.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: Because if it isn’t about the promotion and the grade at work, work starts to take more of a backseat of my life, because I have a lot of crazy fun interests. There’s another business on the side that I’ve always wanted to start or to run. There’s hobbies or my family that I want to be with and around. And to me, it then becomes about exploration, entrepreneurship. And so, I think either I need to tap into that in my job and say, “Where’s the space for me to have more time to explore that?” Or all the more reason why there needs to be that boundary up, because I need that somewhere in my life. And if it’s not going to come from work, it needs to come from outside work.
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand. I understand. And I think it is sort of a different version of the question, “If money was not a factor, what would you do with your life?”
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think for you it’s if the grade was not a factor, if the promotion was not existent, there was no guarantee. It could happen, it couldn’t happen, but it was not a factor. You’re good. You already know that you are good career-wise.
CARMEN: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would it give you permission to do? How would it enable you to be?
CARMEN: Yeah. I have friends that talk about having specific days of the week or specific pieces of their work that are dedicated toward passion projects. They have to be related still to what the company’s mission is and what the company does, but they can be outside of their day-to-day. I don’t know if there would be space or permission to do that at my company. I hope there would be. I think in general, especially if we compare ourselves to progressive popular organizations where people work, sometimes that helps. But I do think there might be an appetite to give that kind of freedom, especially if I can couch it in saying, “This is why. This is what I have spent some time thinking through and ruminating on and coming to the conclusion that I need this in my life. And is there a space for me to have it at work? I think it would make me a better worker. Or is this something that I need to find outside of work? And if so, here might be the implication for what that looks like about my motivation here.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Yeah.
CARMEN: Maybe that’s going too bold. I’m trying to think through how my boss would take that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Look, that is a possibility for the conversation. And whether it’s too bold or not, I don’t know. I think it’s fresh in your mind right now, but I think we need to sort of, before we even start thinking about what the tactical conversation sounds like, it’s continuing to unpack this notion of if you gave yourself permission to think over and beyond the promotion, then how are you then defining success? In the same way that you did for business school, right? When it was like, “Oh, the grade, yes, it’s nice that it’s nondisclosure. Therefore, it doesn’t really inform one way or the other what’s going to happen next. It doesn’t inform what it says about me.” Okay?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: “So, what are the other things that I’m going to focus on that will make my business school experience a ‘successful one’?” So when you think about your career path, at least for the foreseeable future, if promotion is not the leading indicator anymore or we’re putting that to the side for now, we don’t know yet whether it’s the most important indicator or not, what are the other possible leading indicators for you, that if I spoke to you a year from now, two years from now, you would say, “You know what? I’m feeling pretty good.” That are in your control.
CARMEN: I think the within my control is the tough part for me to answer.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: If I think about how I framed this up at the beginning of this conversation, there were two big pieces that I said in the roles that I’ve been happiest in. The team culture is there and the mission is there. I think there’s a third piece around how I show up and being proud of the person I am at work. And I think that that comes from both the work that I am doing, whether it be the type of work that I’m working on or the company itself. And then, there’s also this piece of the culture. And I don’t think I can really at this point shape the culture. And there are some flags around our culture.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
CARMEN: And I don’t love that, but it’s like can I get past that if I’m doing work that I really love and have the space to not be overworked so much that I’m finding myself not showing up the way that I want to. So if success isn’t the promotion, to me, it almost feels like it’s the day-to-day. I don’t love being in charge of things sometimes. And I know that it’s really hard to get into the ins and outs of, “Well, that great idea that we went and did, that was my idea. I invented that or I thought of that.” While sure, that would be nice to me, I find that that type of culture that promotes those types of I statements are not a culture I want to work in. I want to work in somewhere that’s much more collaborative.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And so, working on the things that are most meaningful to our company, the biggest strategy projects, “What’s the most important problem that this organization is facing and how am I helping them think through that and lead through that?” And so, I think I could probably try to position myself so that I am working on that type of work that brings me energy every day and excitement every day. And that sort of starts the wheel, if you will, of feeling good how I show up every day, and therefore producing good work. I feel like I’m in the opposite flow right now, where I don’t feel good about how the workday feels, and therefore it impacts my desire to do more of the work. And I want to be more in that forward flow that I feel like I’ve been in before, and that’s when I’m really at my best.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I think let’s be careful of completely attributing how you show up and how you feel to the type of work that you’re doing and your circumstances, right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because that completely takes away your sense of self, your sense of ownership. So while I want to acknowledge that it can be difficult to consistently, continuously be in an environment that may not align with your values, where the work is not of highest interest to you, how you show up, what version of yourself you bring, there is no version. You’re bringing yourself.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you’re bringing at that particular situation is who you are bringing whether you choose to or not. So I think the question really becomes can you show up in the way that you want to, regardless of the circumstances around you? Or are you basically going to allow circumstances to dictate how you show up?
CARMEN: I like that framing and that sort of push on me to do that. I do think there have been points where I have said, “I’m not showing up my best because that takes effort, and I’m too burnt out to put forth that effort. And I’m not feeling like the work I’m doing and the culture of the company or the people I’m doing it for with are worth it.” And that was a pretty dark place, and I don’t want to be there again. But I want to acknowledge how much I do feel like I feed off of the energy either of others or of the work itself. And I’m not sure I have a clear picture of how to kind of still put on the rose-colored glasses if I don’t like the work and I don’t like the people.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I get it. Look, I don’t think this is about putting on rose-colored glasses every day.
CARMEN: Yeah. Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it’s about waking up and deciding which color glasses are you going to put on, because it’s what you want to do rather than because you’re defaulting because of circumstances.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m saying is what you just described in terms of a very dark time where you put up boundaries because you felt too burned out to do that extra push, that was a choice that you made.
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s okay. I think the discomfort is that you made a choice, and then the result of that choice and the implications of that choice didn’t sit well with you, because they weren’t the implications or the consequences that you used to get.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s something that we have pretty much tattooed into my kids’ brain since the time they were born. We have always told them, “There is a consequence to every action. You choose.” Not, “You choose the action.” Yeah, you choose the action, but think about what the likely consequence is, and be okay with the consequence, right? Be okay with the likely consequence before you take the action. So it’s not about being okay with the action, it’s about being okay with the consequence of the action.
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Everything is cause and effect.
CARMEN: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Could it have had a different effect? Absolutely. You could have walked in and been like, “I am setting up boundaries. I’m only working from this to this and I’m only working this much.” And everybody would be like, “Oh, my God. Thank goodness. Hallelujah. We’ve been waiting for somebody to take the charge in doing this.”
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And, “Oh, we’re all going to do the same thing.” Right? And it would’ve turned out great, but that’s not the way it turned out.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think right now the question you laid out of, “Do I get back on my promo path or do I take a step back?” Those are the actions. I think what you’re really trying to determine is, “Am I okay with what the possible consequences of those actions are, my hypothesis about what the consequences of those actions are?” And what I’m suggesting is the only way you’re going to try to hypothesize, I use the word hypothesize because who knows, right?
CARMEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Hypothesize whether you’re okay with them or not, is do they fit the definition of success that you have for yourself right now? It’s not, “Oh, I just need to have the rose-colored glasses on all the time.” It’s making the choice. So I said a whole lot. Tell me what lands with you there, if anything.
CARMEN: My family’s mantra is, “We all make choices.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Hm. Good job.
CARMEN: So, I say that to people all the time. “We all make choices.”
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
CARMEN: And so, it does resonate. And I think it’s making me also think through the other side of, “Okay. You get on this promotion track and then you get a promotion and then what? Is this the hamster wheel you want to be on of, okay, so then you burn yourself out in your new role for two years. And then, you’re right back here of, Well, what’s the next thing? And so, I think I’m also probably at a point in my career where the closer you get to the top of the ladder, the further away the rungs are. I can’t necessarily assume that that is always going to be available to me. And so, I think it’s an important exercise for me to think through, what is my definition of success if promotion is no longer there? And I think that would be good for me to do, regardless of which path. Because even if the promotion comes, there still needs to be a definition beyond, “You got promoted, now you’re in this role. What do you do?” Because probably not another two years, there’s going to be another one and another one.
MURIEL WILKINS: Carmen brings up an important point here about the reality that many people face the further they are in their careers. As you climb the ladder, the rungs get farther apart. While many high achievers might be fast-tracked earlier in their careers, it’s natural for the speed with which promotions come to slow down. So if your success is only determined by promotion, it can cause some serious angst. At the same time, leaders still need a definition of success. And so, for Carmen, this is an opportunity to rethink success and lean in more to many of the things she says are important priorities for her. I think what’s happening, Carmen, is that up until now, your identity has been wrapped up in, “I perform, I get promoted. And then I perform some more, and I get promoted. And then I perform some more, and I get promoted.” Until that formula didn’t work anymore.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? So we’re trying to come up with a new formula. The new formula doesn’t need to be, which I think is sort of when you laid out the two paths, they were kind of black or white, right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It was like, “There’s either the promotion or there is not.”
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t think that’s the case. I think what you’re saying is, “Huh. Maybe there are other things beyond promotion that would make me feel recognized, like I’m making an impact, this is meaningful, that would give meaning to my work life.” Up until now, it feels like promotion is what gave it meaning, plus mission plus… But without promotion, right?
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I wonder whether the mission and culture would’ve been as meaningful.
CARMEN: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when we talk about the defining success, I think in your case, it’s being able to kind of sit with the, “What does it mean for something to be meaningful for me now?” And that doesn’t mean you turn away a promotion, right? “If it were to happen, great. If it were not to happen because I’ve been chasing meaning, I’m okay, because I got this.” And that’s not to say promotions are bad. If you were to tell me, “No. Getting promoted is what’s most meaningful for me,” then we have our answer.
CARMEN: Yeah. I think why you’re hearing me get stuck is that to me, those often are wrapped up as well. So I think about the things… I’ve been working on actually quite meaningful work lately, really a very important project for my company. And so, I think in the past that has been associated, right? “You did this really impressive thing, and so you get this promotion.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And so, for me, it’s trying to think through, “Yes, that might be work that gets me promoted, but that’s not why I’m doing it. I’m doing it because it’s the work I love.” And I actually do think that that’s what drew me to it in the first place. “You like this.” This is why I’m in this job that I’m in right now and why I took it, because it did seem to be meaningful and things I’m proud of, things that I could talk about outside of work and feel good about and feel like I made a difference to my company.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
CARMEN: Even without the promotion, it is the same thing. It’s working on the projects that are the most important, biggest, and most motivating.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, there’s a lot of association, right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I’m glad you articulated that. In the past, when you’ve done the meaningful work and that type of work, it has led to promotion. And you also, early in our conversation, articulated another association, which is if you work really, really hard and go above and beyond, that also leads to promotion. So it’s not just the meaningful work.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s you’ve got to work on important stuff.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you’ve got to work your behind off.
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And again, that formula worked. It all worked very well for the Carmen formula of life, until you decided, “Huh. I don’t really like one of those variables anymore. I’m taking that out of the picture.” So we can’t selectively choose the association.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What it sounds like you’re saying is pretty much if somebody came in the door and they were to ask you, brand spanking new, “Hey, how do I advance here quickly?” It sounds like what you would say to them is, “Work on important stuff and go above and beyond. And that increases the chances of you getting promoted.”
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you can either wait and hope that that formula within your company changes. Option number two is you can change how you deal with those two variables, i.e., work on important stuff, how much you work, knowing that then the output from that equation is likely to change, possibly. Or you can explore whether there are any other types of equations that could work for you either in terms of the variables, what’s the X plus the Y? Or what it equals on the other side. Right? So, something has to change. Either the goal changes or the way you’re getting there changes. But you already know what sort of staying the course looks like. Again, it’s very predictable. It’s what you’ve done. You’ve done it well. And so, now it’s, “Do I do something different?” But if you’re going to do something different, you’re going to possibly get something different.
CARMEN: And I think I’m okay with that, as long as that piece around doing the meaningful work and getting that recognition in a different form is there in a way that it hasn’t felt like it’s been there for me recently.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: And so, I think there are ways, if you’re still thinking about the most basic equation of time + work = reward, and saying, “I’m willing to swap out that reward if I lower the time and increase the importance of the work.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Look, you’re in business, right? It’s pretty simple. Revenue – expenses = profit.
CARMEN: Yeah. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Equals margin. So one are the three things, you either decrease your profit goal or change the profit goal, and then you can tweak the revenue and expenses, or you increase revenue or you lower expenses. At the end of the day, what you and I probably didn’t need to go and spend a ton of money on business school to figure that out, but at the end of the day, that’s what it is. And yeah, there are drivers. So I think that’s exactly it. Now, what I’m curious about is this recognition piece. If that were to look different, how could it look different in a way that would still make you feel recognized?
CARMEN: I think there are some frank conversations I can have with my boss about that. I do think that we do have a pretty hierarchical organization, and so I would need him to be taking some actions that establish my credibility in the company. So I want the ability to have more opportunities to work on these types of exciting projects. And so, I think for me, that means ensuring that whether it be at sort of the larger company gatherings or whether that be presenting to the board or something like that, those opportunities to showcase my ownership or my contribution. If I think what was I getting from a promotion? Money and credibility. We can put the money aside for a period and talk about what else creates credibility? And I do think there are opportunities to do that and to still be recognized as a strong performer and as an expert without necessarily getting the promotion.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
CARMEN: We have a lot of people who have been at our company for years and stayed at their level and are very well-respected and seen as experts and are quite satisfied and happy in their role at their level. And so, I think it’s how do I continue to work on some of those exposure and reputational pieces that get me the recognition I need? And I think one of the ways to notice that as well is just what’s the new set of work that comes down the pike toward me when this set of work is done? When this project is starting to wrap, what are the things that other people are seeing are a good use of my skillset? And aren’t those things that are challenging and of strategic importance to the company and to the board, to the CEO?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
CARMEN: And so, if that’s the case, then that’s a sign that I’m still getting all of the benefits of people knowing that I have a lot to contribute, without it necessarily needing a title bump to do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So a couple of things. One is it sounds to me like you look for signs. And we should look for signs, absolutely. Sometimes the signs are looking for us. They’re looking for us to make a move to see whether it should respond. So, what I mean by that is even in that example you just gave, “Well, let’s see what kind of work comes my way to see if they really mean it.” It’s like, “Hmm, let me wait to see if they give me flowers to show if they really like me.” Or do I say, “Hey, if you really like me, you should give me flowers.” “Oh, okay. Yeah. Boy, we didn’t know that. We thought you wanted cookies. But yeah, we’ll give you flowers if that’s what…” Or “No, we can’t.” “Oh, okay. Well, now I understand.” So just be careful of always waiting for the sign, and know that sometimes a lot of times it’s helpful to say, “Hey, here’s what would make me feel recognized.” And then, wait to see if there’s a response to what you’ve actually put out there. In the same way that you just said, “Maybe I should be having these frank conversations with my,” I think you said your boss or your manager, “around the type of work.” Right? It’s very hard for others to react to what you want, particularly if it’s not on the predictable path, if you haven’t articulated what you want. If every day what I want is a cup of coffee, and I’ve had a cup of coffee every day for 20 years. And my friend brings me a cup of coffee every day. And then, one day I’m going to secretly want a cup of tea, and they bring a cup of coffee, it would’ve made life a lot easier if I had said, “Hey, do you mind bringing me a cup of tea instead?” Now they have a choice to say yes or no. All right? So be careful of the signs. The other thing is we started off this conversation and you framed the question as, “Do I get back on my promotion path, which means grind, grind, grind, grind, grind, or take a step back from the promotion path and break with what I’ve done my whole life?” And it was sort of simplified to, “Do I follow the promotion path or not?” And actually, I think as we’ve been talking, the question is a bit broader than that. That it’s not necessarily about the promotion path, it’s what is the career path you want to take moving forward that is most meaningful to you? It is much more about how do you shape your career for the foreseeable future in a way that is meaningful to you? There can be a promotion in the works in any of it, but that’s not what’s defining the path anymore, unless what you determine is what’s meaningful is a promotion. Do you see the difference?
CARMEN: I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’d encourage you to think about it much more as career path rather than promotion path. And if you do it in that way, what does that allow you to do moving forward?
CARMEN: I think it makes the conversations with my boss much more open and less one-sided because it’s about how can I forge a career at my company that will bring the best to both of us? As opposed to I was sort of coming into it saying, “How do I frame up for my boss, who very similar background to me, ‘Hey, I don’t want to work 70 hours a week anymore.’“ And so, I think it brings to me the opportunity to have a conversation that also feels much more sustainable with him about, “This is the work I love. This is what brought me to this job. This is what you hired me to do. These are the things that sustain me. These are the things that have been particularly painful over the past couple of years. In order for me to not feel like the pain part has overtaken the good part, I need to rebalance these scales and start from a place around the work that I’m doing and how that influences how I show up?” And then, what is a manageable workload as well for me to not start to go down a downward spiral of burnout, and also be a better employee, and be bringing more and be bringing some of the work product and the insights that I think he expects from me, having seen me do that in the past and having hired me. And then, from there, “Well, in order for this to continue to sustain and for me to continue to feel motivated to make the choice every day to show up happy and giving it my best, then these are the types of things I expect. And here are going to be the things further down the road that I’ll be asking for in terms of projects or type of work or type of recognition.” And am I continuing to pursue work that is up to my standard of what’s really meaningful? And what are the things that motivate me? Because I do think I also have high standards for the work I want to be doing and the work that does motivate me to show up every day excited, enthusiastic, and willing to give it my all within comfortable boundaries. I think that’s always been part of the problem as well, is I’ll give it my all and I’ll give it my all, all of the time. And now I’m saying, “It doesn’t have to be just because there are boundaries, that within those boundaries I can’t still excel and succeed.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
CARMEN: “Putting up boundaries doesn’t mean turning off.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. And that’s the decision and choice and realization that you’ve come to. It doesn’t necessarily mean that that’s the realization everyone else has come to.
CARMEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I would like for it to be, but I don’t want to sit here and globally say, “Oh yes, since you’ve realized that, everybody else realizes it.” I think that’s the rub.
CARMEN: Yes. And I think there’s some work I can do resetting and understanding there are still some of my peers with whom I need to reset, because they are still looking at me going, “What happened over here?” And so, I think that’s something for me to also think through is where do I need to go back and mend some?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so that’s… You asked at the beginning of the conversation, “If I was to reset, if I was to kind of take a different path, how do I do that in a way that then I’m not going to be perceived as,” I think you said, “quiet quitting?”
CARMEN: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, that’s a lesson learned. And I think in general, whenever you’re about to do something different than what you’ve typically done in the past, you kind of want to give people a heads-up and give them context. Because what happened before when you didn’t follow your typical, which is, “I’m going to work, work, work, work, and I’m going to deliver, deliver, deliver and over-deliver and over-deliver,” is, it’s kind of like you didn’t meet your brand promise. You know?
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Think about, I don’t know what your favorite brand is, but I have a favorite hotel, a hotel brand, and if I go to one in a different city and I’m like, “Ugh, what happened?”
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: “It’s not like the other. What?” The disappointment is even more than if I had gone to my not-so-favorite hotel.
CARMEN: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, consistency, people follow and trust consistency, good or bad.
CARMEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what do you do when you’re going to change what the brand represents? You have a better chance of giving a heads-up.
CARMEN: Yeah. And I think, I don’t want to make it sound like it was an overnight decision, that just one day I woke up and I was like, “You know what? Computer’s going to get shut at 5:30 today.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Yeah. It doesn’t need to be overnight. But any reset, if you’re operating in a vacuum and not impacting anybody else, then who cares? You can reset all day long, all the time. You don’t have to tell anybody. But when you’re changing something in the system, which you’re part of the system, you’re part of the ecosystem, and the rest of the organisms don’t know or aren’t part of the flow or haven’t even noticed, or are not changing themselves, then it causes disruption. It causes a break. So, the fact that you even said, “Should I break with what I’ve done my whole life?” You already broke with that. The break has happened. And so, now it’s, What’s the path moving forward? So we’ve talked about quite a few things. Let me just calibrate. What do you feel your action steps can be, based on what we’ve discussed?
CARMEN: I think the most important thing for me is to spend time thinking. And I do well thinking and then committing to writing a definition of success where a promotion is an optional or an icing on the cake, not the crux or the definition of it. And then, from there, what about that definition is possible and feasible within my role right now, and what isn’t? And start to map out what that looks like and bring that to my boss and have probably a meaningful conversation that says, “Here’s what I need to feel successful and to feel like I am positioning myself to be my best here, to give the company everything I have to offer, while also protecting myself.” And then, probably after that with his support, having some maybe difficult but frank conversations with my team and places where there might still be some areas of tension or discomfort that say, “This is how I’m going to operate. These are the things that are core to me that you’ve always known, but these are things that might feel different. And I’m acknowledging that. And I’m apologizing for not having broached this sooner.” But kind of getting back on the right footing with where I feel like there might be some places where there’s still some rifts with my peers and hope that they accept it. I think that’s also out of my control. All I can do is set expectations. If they decide that they don’t want to work with someone that they think doesn’t work more than 45 hours a week, 50 hours a week, then I can’t help that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And what I appreciate about what you’re saying is you are letting the ownership of the choice lie where the ownership belongs. So even after the conversation with your boss, if it seems like the role or the path and the way that you have now envisioned it for yourself in terms of what brings meaning to you is not possible in this environment, then now you’re at the next step of having to make a choice. Is this the environment you want to operate in, knowing clearly then what that would look like. Or are you choosing this other path that you’ve envisioned, and seeing if there’s another environment where it’s possible. But it does sound like there’s a bit of validating what’s possible first before moving to, “Do I stay, or do I go?”
CARMEN: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: How do you feel?
CARMEN: I feel good. I feel like we went somewhere different than how I had framed up. And I’m perfectly fine with that, because I didn’t really love this sort of catch-22 I had presented at the beginning, where neither of them really felt like a win. And I feel like this reframes it in a way that allows me to not feel like I’m having to choose between two compromises.
MURIEL WILKINS: Good. It sounds like you’re, at least for now, unstuck.
CARMEN: Feeling unstuck, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we redefine what career success looks like, as Carmen did, we also need to establish the boundaries that enable us to pursue that success. But boundaries can be so tricky. As the writer Prentis Hemphill has said, “Boundaries are the distance at which I can love you and me simultaneously.” I’ve often thought about how this applies in the workplace, that boundaries at work are the distance at which I can pursue what’s important to the organization and me simultaneously. The place to start for Carmen and many others is by understanding what’s important to you. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I received some feedback that the team said they didn’t feel like they were being recognized. There was feedback that they felt fearful to push back and that they couldn’t express their opinions.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a five-star review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. Want to hear more about each episode? Join the
Coaching Real Leaders
community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. And if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe, sound editor, Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Do I Set the Right Pace To Meet Our Strategic Goals?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone will call Mo to protect her confidentiality. She’s worked in the higher education sector for decades, and she continues to be driven by the work and the relationships she gets to build.
MO: To be able to see students, to get to know them, to get to see how they grow and change during these four years, and then to see them have success as they launch into the world, and then to see that they reach back so quickly to give back and to see the way that our community supports our students as they are navigating, exploring their values and their purpose and what they’re feeling called to do. All of that is just really rewarding.
MURIEL WILKINS: For a long time, Mo was at the director level and managed a small team, but recently there was a shakeup.
MO: We had a new leader of our organization who brought in a new structure, and my role was a part of this structure of this new organization that had never been aligned in this way. So in the new role, there was an expansion of my duties. The team grew. It’s the first time in my career that I have been a manager of managers as opposed to managing a small team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mo has taken on more responsibility. She’s energized by the challenge and has ambitious goals, but she reached out to make sure she was approaching these goals in the right way, and to think about ways she can succeed as a first time manager of managers. I wanted to get a baseline of where she was at. So I began by asking her how she felt about this new increase in responsibilities.
MO: It’s been exciting. It’s been great to still be in an institution where I still feel called to do this work, while also having the opportunity to grow and to learn. Love to learn. It’s nice to have that expansion of learning. And there were all the areas that now report to me I had a little bit of insight into. I had been an advisor at one point, so that was not something that I had no idea about. Success coaching, completely new. So to have that report to a person who reports to me has been a new area to learn about. So I’m now learning about things that were just beyond what my original scope of work was.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so what brought you here? Why are we meeting? What’s going on?
MO: We are meeting because there are some goals we have as a team that cannot be accomplished in a single year or a single semester. They’re going to take years of effort and work. They’re also going to take multiple collaborators. Our team cannot do it alone. So we’re relying on so many partnerships and collaborations. And so that is a lot to keep track of and also, to know what is the right pace? What is the right amount to get done in one year toward a goal that I can set a timeframe on it and say, we want to have this done in three years, but some of it is outside of our control because of all these multiple collaborators. And so it’s hard to know what is the right pace to do this work, what is the right timeline to even project and guess might be the right time to allow us to start to achieve some of these goals. And what is the right allotment of my time? So, this is the first time that I have been in this more strategic role as opposed to just doing and managing. And so I am just still trying to figure out what is the right allotment of my time? What is the right timeframe to put on these goals? And how do we know if we’re measuring progress in the right way? These are the questions that I struggle with almost daily.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. And what does that struggle look like?
MO: It looks like just a constant wonder of, am I getting this right? Am I spending my days in the right way? Should I be doing more? Should I be doing things differently? The inability to feel confident that the way that I am arranging my days and weeks and months is the correct and accurate way to get us where we are trying to go as an institution and as a team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So lots of unknowns for you around how to map out the future, not only for your team and the strategy and as you said, the pacing and the timing to be able to reach your goals, but also, for you personally, in terms of being the leader of this team, how you should be allocating your time. And as you put it, am I spending my time, the “right way”. Okay. So how would you know it’s the right way?
MO: Great question. That is what’s so hard to know. Will I only know it in reverse? Will I only know it at the end of a year when I look back and say, “Oh, we accomplished X or Y?” Am I supposed to know it at the end of every month? Because we were able to set a goal and we achieved it that month. That’s what I’m struggling with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Because the things that we’re trying to do cannot be accomplished in a single year. It’s so far out. It will take so long to know that we have moved the needle towards success. That it’s hard to know working backwards, okay, was this a good week? Did we get things done the right way? There are some goals, right? I could say have one conversation a week with a potential collaborator or partner.
MURIEL WILKINS: To what end?
MO: But what if it took three conversations to actually-
MURIEL WILKINS: What if it took three?
MO: Right? What if it took five?
MURIEL WILKINS: Got you.
MO: I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. I hear you. You’re looking for the formula.
MO: I am.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know if there is a formula, Mo. Okay?
MO: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you’ve got to create your own formula, and it’s a hypothesis, right?
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you this, right? Sounds like you’ve worked directly with students–
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: –as well. And you articulated that what you love about the work that you’ve done and the community that you’re in, is that it’s in support of these students being able to launch. Now, I presume when these students come in, they’re four years out from that launch?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Call it one to four.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, for those that are four years out, how did you in the past, determine what was the right way to spend your time? So that the ultimate goal would be that they launched successfully in four years.
MO: So, if it was an individual conversation with an individual student, giving them some of the tools and resources and giving them some ideas of experiences that they should be having along the way, was the way to help them think about reverse engineering a successful launch following their degree.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you gave them the information so that they could reverse engineer and say, “Oh, so what do I need to do along these four years to be able to get to this ultimate point?”
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So what would it look like to reverse engineer the goals that you’ve set for your team?
MO: Yeah. I think painting a picture of what success… What we hope the outcomes are and the impacts are, and what our hopes are for just pick a time. Whether that’s three years or four years or two years, and then follow my own advice and reverse engineer it. And so if we say, okay, if we want to have this specific number of courses that embed career readiness, just to pick a number and buy a specific date and then figure out, okay, if that’s the number of courses, then how many potential collaborators would we need to speak with? Knowing that not everyone’s going to say yes, not everybody’s going to buy in. Then figuring out, okay, do we think that half the people will, or do we think that a third of the people will? And just like you’re saying, a hypothesis, make that guess and start working toward that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I do think there’s a bit of a reverse engineering. So I think there’s two parts to it. There’s the, how do you get your team tracked and pacing? And then there’s the, how do you spend your time within that? So let’s tackle the team piece. And it sounds like you already have goals that are established. The question is, when are those goals supposed to be met by?
MO: Right. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So while you can create a hypothesis, it needs to be informed, and then you want to test it. And so my question is, where did these goals come from? What’s the context of these goals? Are they in support of bigger goals for your institution? What is the container that they’re in that might give you a better sense of what the time range is?
MO: And we’re in a bit of a transition period. So the leader who created this new division that I’m a part of, departed, and we’ve had an interim leader, an acting leader, and now, the new leader is going to arrive and begin work. So, there will be a little bit of a discernment period and a goal setting period and a strategic planning process that our work needs to support.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right.
MO: So that’s why it’s hard to say, okay, should we just say we want to accomplish some of these goals within two years, but what if our new leaders’ strategic priorities are a little bit different and we need to step back and figure out a way to sort out those priorities? So we’re in a little bit of a holding pattern.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So what if that happens?
MO: Then we adjust. We adjust.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you’re leading in a state of ambiguity. That’s what’s exacerbating this, right?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re trying to make things known in a situation that is unknown. So in fact, your feeling of I’m not sure what the future is going to look like is on point because it is unsure what the future is going to look like because the future leadership isn’t here yet. The strategic planning process hasn’t happened. And so you’re trying to make these decisions around goals for your team in a vacuum.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right.
MO: Right. Exactly. And yet, I want to do a little bit of strategic planning ourselves in a very draft form so that when the new leader arrives, we have some things for that leader to react and respond to. The leader may say, “Nope, none of this.” Or the leader may say, “This seems good.” And so that we are not just waiting, but that we are ready to respond and to show, okay, this is the value based on the strategic ideas that you will bring. Here’s the value that our team can bring in support of this new leader’s vision.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So you’ve articulated two options and you’ve got to choose one.
MO: Right. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re either in a holding pattern, which is, you know what? We’re not doing any planning. We’re not doing any goal setting, we’re not doing any of that. We’re just going to wait until new leader provides clarity. Or you decide that you’re going to head towards some destination, right? Not quite sure which one yet, but you’re going to figure it out, which means you’re going to do your own interim planning process and start working towards those goals. What you can’t do is be in a holding pattern and head towards your destination at the same time. It’s physically impossible. So I think what I’m hearing around what you’re struggling with is not necessarily the timing of marching towards the goals, but you need to take it to step one, do I even want to claim these goals and own these goals and make a plan against them and do the work? Or do I want to wait?
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so which one are you leaning towards?
MO: I’m leaning towards still planning because the leader who is coming, is known to me. This is a leader who actually hired me to move into the role that I was in prior to this new expanded role. And so I know a little bit about what matters to this new leader, and I think that the work that we are doing will be in alignment with his goals.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: So, I would love to have some things ready for response, even if we have to set us aside and say, “that’s not it.” No… no. Wrong goals.
MURIEL WILKINS: Wrong goals.
MO: Remake them, right? Recreate them. That would be okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re okay with that?
MO: Completely okay with that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. So that’s where your confidence is going to come from.
MO: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Your confidence is going to come from or is coming from, no matter what happens, I’m okay with it. If these are the goals that this new leader agrees to, yay. If these are not it, that’s okay. We keep it moving.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: What it sounds like you’re not okay with is just being in this holding pattern and not doing anything.
MO: Right. That’s hard, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
MO: Most of us want to-
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I see your face all scrunched up.
MO: Right. Most of us want to feel like we are moving toward goals. So yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Most of us. Although this morning I was sitting there, I’m like, I don’t want to move. I just want to be still. Can I just be still for a while? For a while. But I hear you. Mo started off this conversation by sharing how excited she still is by her job, how much it energizes her, and that she had some concerns about knowing some of the things she wants to accomplish, but not sure if she’s pacing out goals correctly. As a first time manager of managers, she seemed a bit overwhelmed by the set of challenges she was facing, which she first articulated as her goals being dependent on other stakeholders. As we spoke though, we teased out a few related issues that we’ll dive deeper into. First, we learned in terms of the specifics that it isn’t just that she’s leading a newer, bigger team, but also, that there have been shakeups in the leadership ranks above her, meaning setting a strategic vision is even trickier. That feeds into the problem she articulated around not knowing if she was pacing work and goal setting correctly. She’s leading through some ambiguity here. And when that happens, I like to coach people through possible approaches or options to see how the different scenarios might play out, which got us to the question around whether she should take initiative to set a strategic plan, knowing it might change or wait until a new leader is in place and she’s able to make that decision based on something she’s confident in, that if she does move forward and the direction later changes, she’ll be able to pivot. The first step is deciding on the destination, and then we can work through her planning process on how to get there and how to time it correctly. She can reverse engineer it. Let’s dive back in as we start to think about that process and how much of her work depends on other stakeholders as I ask her, how big of an impact could her collaborators have on her timing?
MO: That’s challenging. And I’m thinking a lot. They completely control the impact on timing because some of the collaborators that we most need to buy in have a lot of independence and control over their work. And so, it is completely, they hold all the impact of this timing because there could be people who say, “Absolutely not. I don’t want to be a part of that.” And so the search that continues for the people who might say yes, and then once the people say yes, it might be, okay, but that’s not going to work for this upcoming semester, but I can see doing that a year from now. And so, the timing is completely out of our control.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So it’s out of your control. I didn’t ask you though whether the timing was in your control or out of your control. I asked you, how can you gauge how much of an impact these collaborators can have on the timing? Meaning, how are you going to know how to time things given the collaborators?
MO: I think that’s where I’m stuck.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s imagine you’re the collaborator and somebody else is working on something and it’s using resources or needs the resources that are under your control. How would you want them to relate towards you as they’re planning something out, which clearly you have skin in the game?
MO: I think I would like them to relate to me by recognizing that maybe that it aligns with my goals too. So being in alignment on what we both hope to achieve, but then also, just having enough notice to be able to start working on it and to do it well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You used the word getting buy-in from your collaborators, which is part of what you’re saying in terms of aligning and goals, and then how is it executed? So how much gaining buy-in is going to be part of your process in planning towards your team’s goals? Or how much have you already done? I’m not sure.
MO: Yeah. So some relationships have already been built that I think will lead to buy-in. Just last week, a member of the team and I started talking about where do we think our strongest allies are and who might be in a quick yes so that we could start working together. So some of that is already done. I think it’s just a matter of sharing this vision with some key allies and potential partners to see if we can get a yes from them. And then once we get a yes, what is the timing that works for them? I think that’s where I have been stuck is, all of this takes typically one-on-one conversation, and it may not take just one conversation. There may be follow-up conversations. And so that is what has been a challenge, is to not know if I have four conversations in a week, is that enough? If I have four conversations in a month, will that be enough? So I guess the best way to figure it out is just to start. So maybe you set a goal, which would be maybe set a goal to have two conversations a week and see what is the yield? Does that yield one person who says, “Yes, let’s keep talking.” Or does that yield one, “Yes, let’s do this.” Or does it, for the people who I talk with that week, where they’re zero takers on potential collaboration and that could therefore inform the hypothesis of how many conversations it might take.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Look, I think you’re looking for this magic number and you don’t have a track record yet, which is really where the source of discomfort is. You don’t have something to say, this is what you right should do and it will guarantee that you get to these results.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s never a guarantee. All you can guarantee is the effort that you’re putting in, and you want to make sure that that effort is aligned with the overarching goals that you’ve set for yourself or for your team. What’s interesting to me is that you’re focusing on the number of conversations, the quantity of the conversations, rather than the quality of the conversations. And I would say that alignment, gaining alignment is a function of both.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Quality and quantity, with probably a higher index on quality, because that’s where the meat is. That’s where you can align on objectives. You can find out what’s going on with them, what are they willing to do, et cetera. So when I say that, the focus on quantity versus quality, how does that land with you? What does that make you think of?
MO: I completely agree. And yet, when I look at my schedule in the week and trying to figure out where do I put these conversations, how many do I even try to squeeze in, given the way that my schedule currently exists? I think the reason I’m looking for the magic number is I’m trying to figure out, okay, am I trying to find space for one conversation per week, or am I trying to find space for a larger number than one per week? And so even though the quality matters once I’m there, just even finding-
MURIEL WILKINS: The space.
MO: Building in the space for the quantity that need to be there is the unknown. It’s just unknown. How many should I be trying to find space and time to make?
MURIEL WILKINS: And in the order of priorities, I’m assuming you have priorities. In the order of priorities, where do these conversations or this gaining alignment with the collaborators doing the strategy work, where is it from a priority standpoint?
MO: It’s a really high priority for me. Because what we are trying to do is create a campus-wide culture, meaning that students don’t necessarily have to come to a member of our team to gain the preparation and the readiness that they need to launch. But it’s just infused. It’s everywhere. And so in looking at trying to create this campus-wide culture, which is just so hard to get your hands around, right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
MO: It’s hard to know when is enough. Is it if every academic department has this as a part of their major declaration process? Is that too late? And so does it therefore need to be during a first or second year experience that every student has?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So I can’t tell you that because I’m not in the institution, right?
MO: Yes. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And nobody else is going to be able to tell you that because you’re leading this. And that’s part of leadership. Part of leading it is being able to put a stake in the ground to say, “This is how we’re defining success, and this is the evidence we would be looking for that would help indicate that we’ve achieved the culture that we want to achieve.” But it starts with, well, what is that culture? And then what evidence? What would we need to see to believe that this culture is now in place? And I’m saying you need to put a stake in the ground as the leader, but because it’s an institutional or organizational-wide culture that you’re trying to implement, you can’t come up with what that looks like in isolation, which is where the process of getting alignment and getting folks to provide input and weigh in on what they think the culture should be on, what they would see as evidence as to what they define as success is going to be important for you.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m hearing a couple of things. One is, this is one of your high priorities in terms of defining the culture and then defining the plan that’s going to get you there and aligning with the collaborators that are going to get you there. And the other thing I’m hearing is, but it’s unclear what we’re aiming for. So I think you need to start with getting clarity on what you’re aiming for. There’s no way you can answer, how much time should I be spending in my calendar, if there’s not some clarity around what the destination is. If we go back to this airplane, you’ve decided you’re not staying in a holding pattern, you’re going to move towards a destination. Well, you’ve got to figure out like, well, what’s the destination that I’m going to? And then you need to check, how much gas do I have? Do we have enough? Are they able to let us land there? And so that’s the equivalent, right? You have to articulate destination. Then you need to go check with the collaborators and say, “Is this doable? Are you aligned with this? Does this fit with your vision?” So there’s a strategic level muscle that needs to start from an umbrella standpoint to see the whole process and own it and drive it before you can get down to the nitty-gritty of, how are we timing this thing? Right?
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then in terms of your question of, well, then how do I spend my time? Look, I think if you truly feel like this is one of your priorities, one of your top two or top three priorities, then I think you need to use a bit of a different approach than what you have used. The approach you told me you’ve been using is you look at your calendar and you look at where can you squeeze in this strategic planning and these strategic conversations. I think if the strategic planning and the strategic conversations are your priority, it should be the reverse. That should be in your calendar, and then you’re looking to squeeze in the other stuff.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you did that, what would that look like? How much space would you be giving it? And what would it look like in your calendar?
MO: I think I would have something that’s helping move toward this priority four out of five days of the week.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve got your answer.
MO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what makes you land on that? Four to five days a week?
MO: Just because I think the recognition that it’s going to take. This will not be achieved without investing significant time, and it is going to take multiple conversations. And those take time. And it probably won’t take a single conversation with any one person. It might take multiple conversations because something that you said about, I’ve got to paint the picture of where we’re going and what I’m hoping to achieve, but then there’s just got to be a lot of listening and a lot of hearing from others, where, what are the challenges that they’re trying to solve for? What are their pain points? And then what are ways that this strategic vision and direction could actually help address some of the things that they are concerned about and that they’re trying to do?
But that’s just going to be a lot of listening, and it can’t be me going in and just talking. It’s got to be having some conversation points, some prompts, and some questions that guide the conversation so that I’m hearing information that people need to share with me. But that’s just going to take time. And so, I think that’s the answer. Is to block this time to try to be available, to try to initiate these conversations just so that I can hear what others are thinking and hoping, and see how we could then get in alignment to still achieve this strategic goal.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I think using this word initiate is important. It’s not just making yourself available.
MO: Right. No, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s initiating it. It’s driving it. It’s matching up your schedule and your time to your priorities, and only you can decide what those priorities are. Particularly because you’re in a state right now of not getting direction. Nobody’s telling you what your priorities should be. Nobody’s telling you where to spend your time. Ironically, it’s like the students you deal with when they get to college, nobody’s telling them anymore.
MO: Right. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? So think about it that way. Okay?
MO: Right. Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s freshman year. And so if you think about it from that standpoint, literally, all jokes aside, it’s freshman year. What advice would you give the freshman in this sense of ambiguity that can also be a sense of freedom and what can you apply to yourself?
MO: Yeah. I think the question that you ask much earlier in the conversation just made me realize, I teach people how to do this every day, and yet…
MURIEL WILKINS: And yet.
MO: And yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? If we would only listen to our inner teacher.
MO: And yet… Oh, it’s a challenge that I’ve been struggling with.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I asked you at some point, what’s the struggle? And so now, looking back on the conversation we had, what would you define the struggle as being?
MO: I think there are two struggles. I think one is, I have had this strategic vision for many years, and yet, we are in this waiting period. And so I think part of the struggle is press forward or wait? And both choices are possible. So I think that’s one struggle. I think the second struggle is, just time is finite. And unfortunately, I wish it weren’t so, but it is. And so there just are a lot of demands on my time, and some of them are things I have to say yes to. And then others are things that I choose to say yes to because they’re things that also matter to me, even though they’re maybe not my top strategic priorities. And so I think the struggle has been how to figure out how to fit it all in, in any given week because it all seems important.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because it all seems important. Right? These are choices, and choices are trade-offs.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because how can I fit it all in when I don’t have all the time in the world? You don’t. As you said, time is finite, right? It’s bounded. Well, not really, but in our physical realm, it’s bounded.
MO: Right. Right. It is.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
MO: It is.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what you’re struggling with is making a choice, but why is making a choice hard for you?
MO: I think because there is so much that we could be doing. There is so much that we already do, and I don’t want to stop doing those things, but yet, I have the appetite for us to do more. And a member of my team who I work with, I learned a phrase from her that I’m a time optimist. She’s a time realist. And so being a time realist versus a time optimist, I’m a time optimist. And so I think that there should be more time to do more and there should be more opportunity to do more as we try to serve our students in the best possible way. And a time realist would say, “You got to make a choice. We can’t do all these things because there isn’t enough time.” So the time optimist that I am doesn’t like that answer and doesn’t want to hear that answer, wants to continue to just push ahead and to try to keep adding more and more, which is unrealistic.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. But you know, there is such a thing that is known as a realistic optimist.
MO: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think this is going to be what we’re going to aim for. Realistic optimism. And the optimism part, it is having a vision that you’re pushing forward towards. You see what’s possible. That’s the optimism part.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: The realistic part is what can be done within the context? The framing of where we are towards that vision? And I think you’re seeing them as mutually exclusive. If I can’t be doing everything right now as it relates to that vision, then I’m not marching towards that vision. That’s not true. There’s a difference between what can I do within the timeframe that I have or the time limitations that I have, which is for you on a weekly basis, 24 times seven, but hopefully you’re not using up all that time. What can I do? There’s a difference between that question and the question, what can be done during that time? And so what’s the difference to you when I say that?
MO: The difference is, finding other people who want to help do the work. It’s spreading it out. To me, that’s the difference.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Because this is where you have to ask yourself, particularly for you as a leader who’s now, what we call scaling up, you went from managing a team to now managing multiple teams. You went to becoming a manager of managers. What is more important to you? That you’re doing the work or that the work is getting done?
MO: Oh, it’s very much important to me that the work is getting done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is where the realistic part is, what can I do within my time parameters? How do I prioritize? How do I make choices? Of which one of the parts that you’re responsible for is making sure that the other work that you aren’t responsible for personally is getting done. So I think I want you to hold this being a realist and an optimist because the reality part is in the present and the optimist part is in the future. And so it’s your capability, your capacity to hold both. Your calendar is what holds you to the reality, present.
MO: Right, exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: The vision is what holds you to the future of the optimist part. They’re not mutually exclusive. In talking through how she might tactically move forward to her goals, we’ve worked through a few important points here with Mo. It was interesting that she zeroed in on the number of calls, on the specifics of how to divide her time as she works towards her goals, which is an important concrete thing to do. To set goals around what she can achieve, what she has control over, what she can measure the results of. But in some ways, she was focusing on the trees and we lost a bit of the forest. I love that we reached this point of being a realistic optimist and how to hold both of those things at once because that allows her to think realistically about her time, how she spends her weeks, and how much time she needs to reach the goals she has for the team, but also allows her to hold onto the excitement and hope she has around those goals and realize that there are things within her control, she just has to make some decisions. I wanted to dive back in because I was picking up on something for Mo, that she’s having a bit of a hard time prioritizing because she has this feeling that time is limited, but that her goals will also take years to accomplish. I asked her about how that tension made her feel.
MO: I feel okay about it. There is part of me who wishes that we were already there. Many of the… There are lots of things that I already wish we had accomplished, but I know that it takes time and I know that it’s okay to invest the time. That’s okay. That’s a good use of time, is to try to work toward accomplishing these strategic directions. But I am just a little impatient, and I wish in many cases, that we were already there. But I just have to keep reminding myself of the work that we have accomplished.
It’s been good to go back and reflect and look through prior strategic plans and realize, okay, these are things that we got done. These are new initiatives that we started, and we are doing them and they are working and they’re good. What’s hard is to look at all of the tactics that we had hoped to implement by this time and that we just haven’t even begun yet. And so that is a call to realism just of, was that too optimistic to try to think that all of those things could have been accomplished in a three or four year time period? I think it’s good to have aimed for it, but it just shows that there’s still so much to be done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I’m sensing that you are looking back and saying, “We’ve been down this road before and we didn’t accomplish it, but man, not on my watch.”
MO: I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: If I’m flying this plane, we are getting to this destination.
MO: We are trying to get there. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: We are trying to get there.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And there’s no magic ball as to whether you’re going to get there or not. Obviously, you wouldn’t be heading in that direction if you didn’t think you could, but that’s what you have to try to figure out is, what is within our capabilities.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And because it’s multi-year, and because it’s culture, look, the culture, this is the thing with culture change. People are like, “Oh, I want to change the culture and it needs to happen in a year.” I’m like, “Well, the current culture you’re in didn’t get created in one year. So why the expectation that it’s going to change to something else overnight?” Creating a new culture is changing organizational habits. And when we think about how much time it takes just for habits at an individual level to change, think about what it takes collectively. And so with that in mind, I’m just curious around what your expectations are. Do you have a sense of what you can expect to even happen within the next year and then the next two years and the next three years? Have you mapped it out in that way?
MO: We’re in a process of doing that right now. There was a larger strategic planning process that then needed to be put on hold just with the change in top leadership. With a new leader starting just in a few months, that strategic planning process will begin again, and then at that point, we’ll know which of the things that matter to us and that we have thought were important will be adopted and which of the things will not be adopted. So I think it’s hard to know where will we be in 12 months, 24 months until we know what the strategic priorities of the institution are and where ours help push forward those strategic priorities.
MURIEL WILKINS: So again, you’re back to, you got to figure out what you can figure out within that context that you’re in, and you’ve already decided you’re going to do that. Why the impatience? How does that help you in any way?
MO: Yeah, I guess it doesn’t.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m not making judgment. I’m curiously and you’re like, “I guess.” You either…
MO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Don’t guess.
MO: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is it helping you? Is it not helping you? Why be impatience?
MO: I think the impatience is at the point that I am in my career, I view this as the final chapter. So within 10 years max, I will decide to retire. It could be eight years, and eight years is going to fly by. And so knowing that there is, just as the weeks have finite bounds on them, the years now I’m starting, it’s not this infinite stretch of my career, but I’m starting to see that there is a pretty finite length of time that will move pretty rapidly just because the years do. The years move pretty rapidly. And I would like this to be a legacy of my career.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MO: The strategic vision.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now we’re seeing.
MO: That’s why the impatience, that’s why the impatience.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s the impatience. Okay. So there’s a level of urgency for you because you’re seeing your timeline with this organization as finite.
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you want to make sure that the work gets done within the next couple of years that you’re going to be there?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because this is your, as you see it, final hurrah. Right? But is it?
MO: In this role? I think it is. Yes. I think is.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s definitely a completion or an ending in terms of time that you’re there. There’s a difference between time being finite and then what happens with impact. Impact is not finite or it doesn’t have to be. So I think the formula that you’re actually solving for, I’m going to go back on what I said earlier. I actually think now that you’ve shared this, the formula you’re solving for is, what should I be spending my energy on in the next couple of years to ensure that it has impact beyond those years?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when we frame it that way, how does that inform where you should be spending your time? Does it inform it any differently?
MO: I don’t feel like it does. I feel like it still calls me to focus on my top priorities of which this strategic vision of this culture is the top, because of the impact that it can have. Because if we get it right, then every student going forward is impacted. Every student. 100% of them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So perhaps where you need to feel rest assured, have some confidence, is that if you put in the effort now, there will be a residual beyond the years, right? It’s no different than, again, I keep coming back to this because you’re in the field of educating young people, and you’ve dealt with alums, alumni. It’s no different than you put in those four years while they’re there. Is that really the end all? When do you start seeing the results?
MO: Right? The results, you can see the results during the four years. You can see the results within the first years. You can see the results in some cases, because I’ve worked with them for a long time, like a decade and two decades later, you still see the results.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. And so the confidence has to come in, can you trust that what you’re doing now is going to have the long-term results, the long-term impact that’s aligned with the vision that you have for the culture? And you may not see it.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I hope you do.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: But rather than thinking, I need to do everything that’s possible, the exhaustive list of what’s possible to see this culture come to life within the timeframe that I’ve put on this because it’s tied to my retirement age, right?
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Not arbitrary.
MO: Right. It’s tied to my life.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. If we put a bit of a different lens on it, which is, what can I do? Where can I put my efforts and my team efforts in the time that we do have, so that it sets the foundation, maybe even the next step. It sets the scaffolding, maybe even more than that for the culture that we hope to have. And as you said, it sounds like that doesn’t really change what you came to around hey, I need to be prioritizing these strategic conversations. I need to be prioritizing the aligning and start off probably a little slower so that I build a strong foundation. And for you, we started off this conversation where you asked, is what I’m doing enough? And so when we frame it that way, in terms of the doing, being in service of the longer term impact of the culture, what does enough look like for you?
MO: Yeah. I think enough looks like defining success maybe in smaller chunks so that it’s easier to know, yes, this was enough. We were able to define what success would look like in year one, and either, we achieved it or we came close. I think in a way, by making the timeframe smaller, instead of realizing that the timeframe is eight to 10 years, figuring out what would success look like in 12 to 24 months? What could we call that? If we could consider it a win, if we were able to do X within 12 to 24 months? I think that that would be more helpful than trying to have this very large goal that has a very long timeframe because it’s hard to know within a shorter timeframe, was it enough? Did we get anything done if you’re constantly looking out so far ahead.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And just because you have the shorter timeframe of what success looks like in the next year, two year, three years, week, doesn’t mean that you’re letting go of the longer term vision and the longer term goal. It’s actually the contrary. Those shorter term milestones are what keeps you moving towards that goal. And maybe instead of asking yourself, am I doing enough? The question could be, am I doing what’s aligned with the longer vision? Because are we ever doing, who knows? Enough is such a relative term.
MO: I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: The question is, are you doing and is it aligned? That’s it. Is what we’re doing aligned with that longer term vision?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
MO: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I can’t remember the name of the book now, but it’s by one of my favorite writers, Ta-Nehisi Coates. In the book, he talks about the march towards justice and anti-racism and how we need to really think about what we’re doing in that area as this multi-generational effort rather than thinking what we’re going to do is going to make us see that vision come to life in our lifetime. It might. It would be great if it did. Of course nobody’s going to say, “No, no, no, no, no, we don’t want to end racism in my lifetime. Let it wait.” Right? Nobody wants to say that.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, there’s the optimism that it will end, that there’s a hope that it ends, and then there’s a realism that it might not end in my lifetime, but that doesn’t mean I’m going to stop the work. So I think in any change effort, that’s the case. What you’re doing with these kids in school, you’re planting the seed in them, you’re creating a foundation so that they can go out in the world, but you might not see as you said, the impact till 20 years down the line. You might never see it, but you have to trust that it’s going to be there, that you’ve done what you needed to do in alignment with them being able to be successful in the world as alums.
MO: Yes. That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you a question. How much are you struggling now versus how you were struggling when we first started our conversation?
MO: So, it’s been really helpful to realize that I need to define success, but then I need to define it in shorter timeframes as opposed to having this very long, far off goal. So I think, that’s going to help me, that’s going to help a lot, and it’s going to help me struggle less, and it’s going to help me realize that enough is a really weird word to try to define as far as a week goes. And so I think that I hope to struggle less. I think there’s a lot to think about, and I don’t do this work alone. They’re great partners in the immediate team. And so this is just really helpful as we anticipate bigger strategic conversations as an institution and as we try to figure out how our work supports those strategic initiatives. Defining success in shorter term groups, that’s just going to be really, really helpful because it will help me feel like… It’ll help me measure what enough is, right? Because if you can figure out what does success look like in the coming academic year, then you can reverse engineer and figure out okay, by May or June of next year, if we want to be at a specific place, then okay, what do we need to do to get to that specific place?
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly.
MO: And so, trying to make smaller goals and name what those milestones are is just going to be so helpful. So helpful. Because the phrase boiling the ocean comes up. Like that is… Of course, I want to boil the ocean. Wouldn’t that be great? No. So I struggle with the wanting to do it all. And so just remembering that you can’t and figuring out okay, what could be done in 12 months and within 24 months? And then measure the path, measure success in those smaller timeframes.
MURIEL WILKINS: In those smaller timeframes with the confidence that it will have a residual impact over and beyond the finite time limit that you’ve set.
MO: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Very nice.
MO: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you. Hopefully, that was helpful.
MO: It was so helpful. I’ve got [inaudible 00:55:34]. So it was very helpful. Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes, it takes a while during a coaching session to really understand my client’s underlying motivation, and we cracked this code further into the conversation as we started talking more about the years left in her career and the legacy Mo wanted to leave. She came into the conversation focused on how to be a manager of managers and how to set strategic priorities, but like with so many leaders, there was also something else at play for Mo – the desire to leave a lasting legacy.
Having a better understanding of this, why she felt the need to move quickly and why she felt frustrated when it felt like things were moving too slowly was the key to her breakthrough. Once Mo came to this realization, it helped her reframe her goals and the milestones she wanted to hit. In some ways, this reframing might help Mo reset her parameters to shift from the idea that she’s doing enough and moving fast enough to ensuring that what she’s doing is aligned with her longer term vision. This shift will help her better reach her goal of doing what needs to be done and making a lasting impact at her organization. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I felt unsuccessful, both in asking for and receiving the support that I needed, but also building trust with the new leadership that I had. Slowly, my team began to be reduced.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of this episode? Join the
Coaching Real Leaders
community, where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show, become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find more from me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show apply @coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward, share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins, and until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Do I Handle Negative Feedback from My Team?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Robin to protect her confidentiality. She’s been at her current company for her entire career, and she’s honed her focus as a leader there over time.
ROBIN: I like to say I grew up here. There’s a great amount of gratitude that I have to the company for shaping me into the professional that I am today. I’ve been fortunate to work throughout the company across all lines of business and functions. I am focused on people, and that has always been an interest of mine, how people respond, how people are inspired, how people are motivated. And I am an agitator of that and a believer in the unlimited potential that people have. I have anchored always back to that as my core foundation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Robin’s journey led her to her current position, which she considers a dream role, but her transition into the role was not without its challenges.
ROBIN: I’ve never had any transition like this in all of my transitions, and I would say this is most difficult, trying to maintain all of the responsibilities. When I came in, the team turned over, so I was not only transitioning in that first 90 days, but I also was doing that alone and trying to navigate and quickly orient myself around what I needed to know, knowing that I would be on my own for a while until I was able to rehire some staff.
MURIEL WILKINS: The situation has improved for Robin, but she says that it’s an unforgiving role with little room for error, and also one that requires her to be both strategic and creative. Nevertheless, she’s gained traction by rebuilding a team and is working on training them up, but she’s recently felt a setback when she received some unexpected feedback from her team. Let’s start there.
ROBIN: I received some feedback from the team and it wasn’t direct. Well, I’ve always created an open environment, a culture of feedback, and there was a scenario where we were all in a face-to-face and some concerns were expressed, and we were up against the clock and I had to go to another meeting. So I asked the team to come together and talk through the feedback that they had, and then we can talk about it together. They were happy to do that. In between that time, HR gave me some feedback that the team said they weren’t feeling heard, they wanted more recognition. There was feedback that they felt fearful to express their opinions, and there was feedback maybe that they didn’t feel like they had a say in the culture or the work that they were doing. To be honest, it hit me like a ton of bricks because immediately in my heart, there was a conflict. This is the core of who I am, so it not only impacted me just on a surface level, but also it went straight to the heart. Of course, I would never want my team to feel that way, and so I just went straight into immediate reflection on how this could be, how I could come to receive this feedback, and the team had this perception.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So first of all, kudos to you for even moving to a place of self-reflection around it rather than immediate reaction.
ROBIN: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I want to understand. When you heard the feedback from HR, did your team eventually also share this with you or?
ROBIN: Yeah. So there was already a meeting set up from my team and it was just such a beautiful call where they all aligned across the feedback and they each had a part in reading out the feedback. And it wasn’t just negative, it was a balance. It was a beautiful picture of feedback from a team. It was a gift, and I was just appreciative on the call. I remained mostly quiet and just attentive and took the notes and repeated back what I heard, and then sent out a follow-up email as well to just confirm what I heard and confirm our agreement together about the path forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So you have spent the past year and a half bringing this team together. You have worked hard to create a culture of feedback. Lo and behold, that culture actually enabled feedback to happen, maybe not in the way that you had expected, but it happened. Your team approaches you that they have some feedback to give you, and then it is also communicated through HR. And what I’m hearing from you is that it landed in a way that was heavier maybe than you expected? You said it hit you like a ton of bricks.
ROBIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is it that caused the feedback itself to hit you like a ton of bricks?
ROBIN: The direct, in my mind, feedback felt like a conflict from what I see and how we engage and the evidence thereof. So in my curiosity, I went back and did an audit of myself. I selected just a couple of mediums to get a snapshot of the sentiment of the team, and I would consider myself on the higher end of self-awareness. That might contribute to some of the conflict I felt because how could this be? I needed more context, so I just went and did my own research. There was a lot of things that came out of my exploration, and sure enough, there was evidence of things that contradict the feedback and there were things that I also missed as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you say conflict, conflict with who or what? Usually when we think conflict, there are two opposing sides or there’s tension. What is the tension?
ROBIN: So, specifically, one example – not feeling safe, the environment is a safe environment to share feedback and direct statements made, this is a safe environment, that conflict.
MURIEL WILKINS: That was being said by team members?
ROBIN: Yes, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you found that the most recent feedback you were getting was contradictory to evidence of what you’d seen in the past or even what you felt was happening?
ROBIN: Correct. And I love that you used that term because it presented a conflict first, and then I found it to be contradictory when I went and looked back for awareness-sake, to retrace my steps, if you will, around where I missed things or where I could have improved.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So you’re now in this place of what’s really going on. I don’t know what to believe, right?
ROBIN: That’s right, a 100%. So I did a pulse check, and then I went and spoke with trusted mentors and colleagues. I got various different responses and all of it helped soothe me, but I knew that I would have to be the one to create the path forward for me and how I responded. And I think my biggest goal was to show up honest, and model humility because that is a value that’s important to me. And a conflict internally was my immediate take was like, “I’m not being humble here. Yeah, you’ve got this evidence that proves that everything on this sheet is not right or what was said, or it’s being exaggerated or taken out of context.” And I felt like it was an attack and in my spirit, that just didn’t feel right.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what I think I’m hearing from you, and you tell me if I’m hearing things in the way that you mean, is this question of not whether the feedback is real or not, or let’s dissect the feedback, but really how do I respond to this feedback that I’ve received?
ROBIN: A 100%. That creates a path forward that we all want to be on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So how do I respond to this feedback that I’ve received that creates a path forward, that we all want to be on?
ROBIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I find it interesting that you described your initial experience of receiving this feedback of there’s a conflict, and I asked who’s the conflict with or with what? And you said, “Oh, well, it’s contradictory to what’s happened in the past.” And yet what I hear is a conflict within, because what you just described is, I’m just visualizing, it’s almost like you have, on the one hand, there’s a part of you who’s like, “Okay, ROBIN. Aspirational ROBIN is humble and honest, and creates the safe space for being able to enable others to provide feedback.” So, she hears, aspirational ROBIN?
ROBIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then I also hear ROBIN who’s like, “What the heck?”
ROBIN: A 100%.
MURIEL WILKINS: Defensive Robin.
ROBIN: A 100%.
MURIEL WILKINS: What? This is not right. I have the evidence. Look, people, this is not what’s been happening and yet this is what you’re saying.
ROBIN: Yeah. That is what’s making me feel like this is more of an attack, and I don’t want to feel that way. I want to be open to the feedback. So if that adds even more context to my conflict, contradictory, aspirational side and how I’m actually feeling side.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So there’s a sense for you of like, am I being attacked here rather than am I just being given feedback?
ROBIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what would it look like for you to respond in a way that’s aligned with aspirational ROBIN, regardless of whether it’s an attack or not?
ROBIN: I have been thinking about this question for a really long time, and for me it’s no response at all. It is outside of obviously taking the feedback and co-creating a path forward with the team. Unfortunately, I don’t see a healthy path forward where I can address the authentic feeling that I have.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what’s the authentic feeling that you have?
ROBIN: That this was an unfairly run collection of feedback that did not consider me. There was feedback collected from the team, but there was no feedback collected from me whereby I could provide the evidence if necessary, to prove the contradiction and to what end anyway. So for me, in that loop going back and forth, like so many other times in different scenarios, I felt there was just no path forward for me to address the true authentic feeling I had, which is the irony of that here given the feedback is so evident, at least to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s so evident?
ROBIN: That the real person I’m feeling like who can’t respond authentically, who can’t share authentically how I feel, is me.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we think of feedback and leadership, the challenge that might most often come to mind is the difficulty that a lot of leaders have in giving feedback to members of their team in a way that’s effective. What’s perhaps less discussed is how leaders themselves hear and receive feedback. Now, what’s interesting to me in hearing from Robin is the level at which she’s trying to approach dealing with the negative feedback that she received. It’s easy to get defensive when it comes to critical feedback, which she feels a bit of, but she’s also trying to take a step back and be honest to see if there are truly growth opportunities here for her. I also want to dig more into this word conflict, which we’re seeing come up in a few ways in this case. One, the conflict she’s feeling between the stories she’s hearing and the way she experienced these situations. And two, the conflict she’s feeling between the different ways she can respond to the feedback. Let’s jump in now to look closer at what she’s experiencing, that she can’t have her authentic feelings about the situation. By digging more into that, we might be able to work towards a resolution and next steps. So I want us to kind of play around with this a little bit because if you don’t approach this from a whole self, meaning all parts of you, you’re always going to feel this conflict and this tension. So if you were to authentically, as you put it, share what your feelings are about this, what would that look like?
ROBIN: I think I’ve tried in the team setting and it sounded something like a claim brought forward and then me saying, “Hey, where do you see that, or when is that happening, or how is that happening,” and them saying, “Well, maybe I’m just assuming, or maybe I’m just emotional right now,” and then a redirection of the conversation so it never really comes to realization, any type of real feedback. And when challenged, or not challenged, but just asking for clarity, it can’t be provided. So in a small way, I felt like that was a time when I tried to respond authentically and I’m usually having to pick that up anyway and/or create my own level of blame so that we can move on, so I can apologize and move on. And so the exercise was really helpful for the team to go in and collectively align and then provide the feedback that was helpful and constructive and authentic where we all felt I think really good. But if I come back to your initial ask of what does it look like for me to respond authentically after somewhat piloting in a smaller setting, I don’t see a path forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so what were you expecting when you responded authentically? What would’ve made you feel like, yes, I was able to respond authentically?
ROBIN: It would sound like I’m not being accountable to how my team feels. It would come across defensive deflective and not help us move forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you responded authentically, you said, that’s what the impact would be?
ROBIN: Yeah, I think based on the feedback, based on the feedback of where the team is. If I responded authentically, calling out evidence of a contradiction, I’m not sure that anyone would receive that without trying to fight back or prove a point.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so that might be how they receive it, but that’s not what I asked you. What I asked you is how would you know that you’ve responded to something authentically?
ROBIN: That’s a good question. I’m sorry. I didn’t even hear that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I might not have asked it in that exact way.
ROBIN: Oh, that’s really good. That’s really good.
MURIEL WILKINS: But how would you know?
ROBIN: I think there’s a feeling like even now, like you asking me that question, it was easy for me to say, “I didn’t even hear that question.” I guess it’s a feeling that I’m not having to be careful or put myself aside. It would feel like I’m not having to press down how I’m feeling or put myself aside for the sake of the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so here’s the thing, I hear you around wanting to have a voice in all of this and feeling like you’re not because you don’t see a path forward because of how it might land. And you can be as authentic and as truthful as you want. You just have to be eyes wide open around what the impact of that might be. But ultimately, it’s your choice. So I would encourage you to not see yourself as choiceless in the moment.
Meaning as long as you keep saying, “Well, because of the way they would receive it, I can’t do this,” that’s fine. Yes, you’re right. That’s probably how they receive it, but I can’t do this, that’s ultimately your choice. You can do it. It might lead to those results. So we should talk about whether those are the results you want, but let’s not use how other people respond as what dictates what ultimately is your choice in terms of how you respond to this feedback.
ROBIN: That’s so good.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
ROBIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So how authentic you are, whether it is about responding to feedback, whether it is about any other thing, it’s ultimately up to you. In that moment, I think what might have been happening is, hey, I’m going to show you that the evidence doesn’t bear out what this feedback is saying. And they didn’t respond in a way that basically said, “Oh my gosh, Robin, you know what? You’re right,” which would’ve been validated your truth, if you will. I’m using the words you used. And what I’m suggesting is your truth is a truth is a truth whether somebody validates it or not. If that’s what you think, that’s fine. Now, whether you share it or not depends on what outcomes you’re driving to. And so in this particular situation, you are very self-aware, and you’re also very aware of what the impact of your response might be. So I think rather than focus on the input, let’s focus on the impact. What is the impact that you want to have on your team now that this feedback has been given?
ROBIN: I want to use this opportunity to bring us closer and to create new opportunities to trust, to extend trust to one another and everyone feels seen, everyone feel valued, everyone feel heard, and ultimately, everyone performing well and feeling inspired because all of us are in the spotlight, if you will, as models for the rest of the organization. So it’s important that the core is healthy and whole.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I hear you around, you want everyone, I’m just going to pick up on one of the main things you said, you want your team to walk away from this process feeling seen, valued, and heard. Actually, you said you want everyone to feel seen, valued, and heard.
ROBIN: Yes, including myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Including yourself. I think the question is who’s going to make you feel seen, valued, and heard?
ROBIN: So good. Sorry. Sorry.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s okay. I can tell this has been a hard situation for you because it conflicts what you thought about yourself and everything that you’ve represented, but yet, here you are. Here you are. The beautiful part of it is you’re seeking it as an opportunity for growth. I just read recently that when… I’m not going to quote it exactly, but basically it’s when we are in these situations and these seasons of difficulty, it can either feel like quicksand or lotus leaves. We’re all in the same mud, but we can either rise like lotus leaves or go down into quicksand. So you don’t have to apologize for the emotions. This is how you value your truth, right? So when I ask that question to you, who makes you feel seen, heard, and valued during this time, how is that landing with you in that moment?
ROBIN: Yeah, I think outside of the work context, I’m just very independent and have been, and there aren’t many that I have to or that I would even hold the responsibility for them to see me or value me. If I think about inside the work context, I have an amazing boss, but we are also in a hierarchy such that he’s an executive. He’s got the day-to-day, and he does see me. So our follow-up conversation was, as I’m thinking about this and talking through this when we did finally have our one-on-one, I didn’t even have to say a word, and he just pretty much responded, shared and reiterated his appreciation for me and his trust in me and my leadership and how much he valued me and how hard this situation is and encouraged me to find the path forward and lean on my strengths and my creativity to have fun along the way and bring others along. So I felt seen and heard then.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is it that you’re seeking from your team?
ROBIN: I think I’m looking for trust from them because in my mind it was kind of shaken a bit to receive the feedback and then know that these other things contradicted. But I, of course, never brought that forward to the team. They just live. They just exist. As far as the team is concerned, our interaction has been either individual and collectively has just been a continuous conversation either in staff meetings or the meeting that I mentioned earlier. We’re moving along and I just want to continue to build on the trust.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you say build on the trust, is it that you want them to trust you more-
ROBIN: Both ways.
MURIEL WILKINS: …or you to start trusting them more? Okay.
ROBIN: Both ways.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what would enable you to trust them more? Because you’re the one who’s sitting here. What would enable you to rebuild how you trust them?
ROBIN: I can’t help but think of Stephen Covey’s Speed of Trust, and it’s an activity that the team and I are also working through right now. And the first one is talk straight. And I love this particular card and behavior, because it not only talks about what it sounds like when it’s working well, but it also talks about what it sounds like when it’s not working well or when it’s the counterfeit of the talking straight. So I think I need to find my own talking straight that is better aligned to my authentic feeling that creates the result and the impact that is desired.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s try to push that to a bit more concrete terms, okay?
ROBIN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s imagine I’m the team and you’re going to talk straight in a way that reflects your truth, your feelings and honors and reflects their truth, their feelings. Let’s imagine you are in a team meeting and some of the feedback that you got, which you feel is contradictory to what you think, and yet this is the feedback that they’re presenting. You’ve already shared that if I go in and I say, “Well, here’s the evidence,” then that’s speaking your authentic truth, but that doesn’t feel good. If you don’t say anything and you just let them go on and on and on and on, then that doesn’t feel right because it feels like your voice is not in it, but yet their voices are heard. So what would it sound like to allow yourself to talk straight and others to talk straight at the same time? How could you tee that up.
ROBIN: Address the topic. So once again, removing us and saying… So an example could be, hey, want to check in on this being a safe environment. Let’s go around on a scale from one to five how safe are we feeling.
ROBIN: “Let’s go around on a scale from one to five, how safe are we feeling?” Maybe get a pulse and then that might generate some additional conversation that could be fruitful if necessary, or at least give me a read on where everyone is and where I might need to go next.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so what that does is give you a read, right?
ROBIN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: Figure out what to do next. What I’m still not hearing is the initial question you brought up, which is, “Where is my voice in all of this?”
ROBIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which I think is the clincher for you.
ROBIN: It is.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re like talking through all of the… You literally, you have the checklist of how to respond effectively to feedback. You get people together, you listen to them, you think through what are the things we could be doing next time differently? Let me do a pulse check. Is it working? What’s working? What’s not working? All of that you’re doing. So even though you said, “How do you respond to the feedback?” I think you have that checklist, what I’m not hearing is the other tension that you brought up, which is somewhere in there it feels like you feel like you’ve lost yourself. So, okay, one way to go is to say, “That’s okay. I know why I’m doing this and I know what I think, and it’s okay. Everybody’s got a right to have their perception. I’m the leader. My job is to make them feel heard, valued, and understood,” or the other things you said, not the other way around, “I’m okay with not sharing my piece.” That’s option number one. Option number two is, “Oh no, I’ve got to share my piece at all costs,” and you’ve already articulated that come off as like, “Let me show you all the reasons why what you’re saying doesn’t make any sense.” That’s the defensive route. And what I’m looking for is where’s option number three, which is you can have a voice and I can have a voice, and then we can choose which path you go forward. I’m not saying that’s the path. I’m saying that’s a path.
ROBIN: Yeah. It’s even awkward for me to even try to go down that path because you’re absolutely right, it’s easy for me to put myself to the side, to your point, option one, where I just say, listen, I’m the leader. I’ll take it on the chin, whatever I’ll submit to the needs of the team. It’s really hard to honor me in that. That is an area of opportunity for me in many settings. So when you were talking, I was thinking, and again, not used to doing this, so I’m going to try it out loud, but I’m not sure how it will even sound. But the thought was, “Hey, I’m sensing that we’re safe here.” Am I off? When I say that it sounds pretentious or even like I’m trying to lead them to also agree.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here, because we’re getting some good additional context about the challenge that ROBIN is trying to work through. We’ve mentioned the conflict she’s feeling, that she’s received negative feedback that she doesn’t necessarily agree with, but regardless, she’s hoping to find a positive and constructive way forward for both her and her team. At this point in the conversation, I felt that a little role playing and working through specific scenarios might be useful for Robin to make things more concrete so that instead of just thinking about it would allow her to start actually playing out different ways she could respond that might feel more authentic to her. That process might also help her step back from focusing on what is right and wrong in this situation and gain perspective on how she wants to move forward. When we started this conversation, you started off by saying the feedback really hit me a ton of bricks, and that felt honest to me, like that was authentic to you, and then you went on to share what happened. I think you need to really hone in on what is honest and authentic versus what sounds right. And I know I’m sort of pushing you to say, “What does it sound like?” A lot of times what is honest and authentic is not that complicated. So let me give you an example. This is not say, this is how you should do it, but I think this is a point, and sometimes as a coach, it’s like modeling, mirroring what could happen. What if there was a situation where you heard the feedback and the response was, “Wow, I have to be honest with you guys, it has been a bit difficult for me recognizing that how you’ve experienced me as a leader is different than how I experienced myself, and what I’m committed to is making sure that there’s a path forward where we can all feel supported and valued and heard. And so as part of that, I want to continue to hear from you around this topic of feeling safe. And so what are you feeling right now on a scale from one to 10, how safe does it feel here? And do you even feel safe sharing that? Because it’s important to me to respect how you feel regardless of how I might’ve thought about it in the past.” Let me pause there. What did you take away from my meager attempt at modeling?
ROBIN: First of all, it felt good, it felt right. It felt like I was considered, and it started with me in what you shared as well. It started with how I was feeling, which I know… that’s the heart of authenticity, how I’m feeling. But I love the, “It may be different than how you feel, and that’s okay,” but I love how it still created space for me to have my own feelings and that not necessarily have to be how everyone else feels or receive the same information. So, I think that to me felt authentic. I think if I think about the formula so that I can extract from that in multiple different settings, I think you led with, it doesn’t always have to be the feeling, but the sentiment or the perception plus the acknowledgement of what you may know to be true that the audience may have shared, plus an invitation for the audience to weigh in and reflect or respond.
MURIEL WILKINS: First of all, I think we tend to think being authentic is letting it all out. I once heard a colleague say, “You can authenticate yourself right out of a job.” It’s like that skit, When Keeping It Real Goes Wrong. And so it’s not about faking it, but you’ve got to also understand that different individuals have a different capacity to hold your authenticity. Not everybody can… I know it’s in a completely different context, but as Jack Nicholson said in that movie, “You can’t handle the truth.”
ROBIN: “You can’t handle the truth.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And who’s to say it’s the truth? It’s your perception. But in a way, what is the goal of ensuring that that, “Truth,” is let out and conveyed? Not to say it shouldn’t, but just be clear around what the goal is. If the goal is so that you can feel a sense of validation, as you said, feel heard, valued. If I get it out, maybe they will say, “Yep, you’re right, and therefore I feel okay. It soothes me.” Good luck, you’re dismissing how they feel if that’s where you want to get them to. And oh, by the way, that’s not their job as your team. It’s the other way around. You’re the one who has to lead in a way where they feel valued, and worthy, and understood. And if you do that, maybe it’s reciprocated, maybe, but there’s no responsibility on their end. So that’s not to say you shouldn’t have that support. I just don’t know if that’s the support you’re going to get from your team. You got it from your boss, great. You’ve talked to other trusted advisors, you lean on other people, absolutely. Get the support that you need from people who can actually give it to you and are in a position where that’s part of the role that they’re playing.
ROBIN: So good.
MURIEL WILKINS: So yes, you can be authentic, but authenticity does not mean I got to let every… It’s not unhinged. Yes, you can be honest, but it’s not unhinged. Choose what you want to share. Let’s not even call it honesty and authenticity. I think the question really is what do you want to share? What do you need to share and what do you want to share in that moment that makes you feel like, “Hey, I’ve acknowledged me and I’m acknowledge everybody else?”
ROBIN: I’m going back to what really landed with me, which is let’s remove authenticity because that can get complicated and just need to make a choice on what I need to share, and I can reverse engineer, this is what I was saying, the intended outcome, and maybe start from there and then work my way backwards onto what needs to be shared.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what I’m hearing you say is, “Let me sort of have my eyes on the goal, which is again, to make my field team heard, understood, and we have a pathway forward.” And I’ve heard you use the term a few times around, “Wanting to move forward, wanting to move forward, wanting to move forward.” And yet what we keep talking about is this feedback, and going back to what happened, and going back to the evidence, and going back to all the things. Marshall Goldsmith, who, I don’t know if you’re familiar with, amazing executive coach and writer, coined the term feed forward, which is all about what are the suggestions to move us forward rather than feedback, which is kind of a retrospective, it’s kind of like Janet Jackson, what have you done for me lately?
ROBIN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You know? It’s all looking back and staying there and reacting to that rather than paving as you put it, the path forward. And I sense that you have spent time in the gathering of the feedback, and I’m wondering, what role can you play in now shifting from the retrospective to the prospective, which is what do we want to have happen in the future? What role do you think you can play in moving things forward?
ROBIN: Prompting, framing, framing it that way, and not anchoring on what was said before, but acknowledging the current, the present. And that might be related to a specific item, or it could be related to a feeling or a sentiment across the culture, and just maybe prompting the question, “All right, how would you like to see? Or ideally, what would it look like or what would it sound like? What do we need to do now in order to get to that point and inviting that type of conversation?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I think it can be simplified, pick one of the areas where you got feedback. So, one of them was not feeling heard, so being able to say, “Hey, I get it. I heard you around not feeling heard. That is not the way that I want you to feel.” That’s the acknowledgement. “I own that that was the impact on you.” Acceptance, I own it. “I don’t want you to feel that way. It’s important to me as a leader.” You’re being honest, that’s-
MURIEL WILKINS: … it’s important to me as a leader, you’re being honest. That’s the honesty that you’re sharing. It’s important to me as a leader that you don’t feel unheard to the best of my capabilities.
ROBIN: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I commit to an effort to make you feel heard to the best of my efforts. Now, what might make me feel heard might be different than what makes you feel heard, and I want to make sure you feel heard. So ,Jane or whoever, whichever team member, I’m making up that name, “Jane, I’m just curious. I have some ideas, but I’d love to hear what makes you feel heard?” So you’re creating a path forward based on the impact that you want to have, but because you’re really talking about feelings here, you’ve got to understand what makes them feel a particular way. You can have a hypothesis, but you need to validate it. So the pulse check for the sake of just a pulse check, I mean, which pulse are you checking?
ROBIN: Sure. That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the practice of feed forward is asking for suggestions, but also being mindful that part of the ownership for you is you’ve also got to come up with, “Here’s what I want to do,” and that’s the part. Is that process authentic to you? What would make that process authentic to you?
ROBIN: It is authentic to me. It’s actually right in line with my normal style anyway, because I’m always thinking about just how do we move forward and how can it be better. It’s just my growth mindset, that’s my leaning anyway. And so I think it’s natural for me to maybe lean on this first as a tool rather than my initial leaning, which is to, it’s not always bad, but I just always want to assess and reflect, and there’s just not always time for that. And now that you’re mentioning this, I think of leaders that I see model this often, “Hey, so what’s the recommendation, or where do you think we should start, or how do you see it?” Paint done for me. And even just asking that question naturally progresses the conversation in a constructive way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. And you can’t move to action without laying the groundwork. So let’s not dismiss the process that you’ve already gone through. If we had started this conversation and you said, “I want to move straight to action,” and I said, “Okay, what’s happened?” And you didn’t tell me that you had the conversations around trying to understand the feedback, I think you used the word apologizing, etcetera, then you might not be ready to move to action.
ROBIN: That’s so good.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you want to be careful of is staying stuck in those initial phases and never moving forward, stuck in the awareness phase. Because essentially, I mean, the step is you become aware of the feedback, then you’ve got to acknowledge the feedback, which you used the word apologize. Sometimes it requires an apology, sometimes not. But you, at the very minimum, need to acknowledge that their perception is their reality regardless of how you feel about it. Then you’ve got to accept it, which is take ownership around, “It is what it is. This is the situation whether I like it or not, this is how people feel,” and then you can move to action, which is the forward piece. But if you stay stuck in just, “I’m aware of the feedback, I’m dissecting it and assessing it,” and keep on trying to find out whether it’s true, whether it corroborates, whether it doesn’t corroborate, it’s not to dismiss all that, but at some point you’ve gathered enough, what do you want to do? And that’s your choice. You can stay in that, but you’ve already seen what it leads to. I mean, what is it leading to? I don’t know. To me, and I don’t know if that’s a good situation.
ROBIN: Well, no.
MURIEL WILKINS: You don’t want to be led to me.
ROBIN: No. Well, and what I’m hearing you say too is because I do believe that we are on the forward journey, but now I feel like I am also on it. I was moving the team forward, but I wasn’t on the forward journey.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
ROBIN: That’s what I heard you say like, “Yeah, I’ve moved on with them, but I was still at the evidence and now I feel like I’m seen, and I see a clear path for me to join them.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Who’s doing the seeing when you say I’ve seen, who’s doing the seeing?
ROBIN: Well, I think I’m choosing, I’m making the choice to acknowledge where we’re at and accept it, contradiction or not. And the expectation for the team to cooperate is no longer on the table, and I can just make the choice to accept, to have an awareness, acknowledge it, what you just walked me through, accept it, and we continue on the path together. And then I think another action for me is to fortify the support outside of the team for myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Fortify the support outside of your team. Look, we started off this conversation when you shared about your background and what drives you and the ability to shape the career that you’ve had at your organization over all these years and the strength that it showed. Yes, others will fortify you, but my sense is that you have fortified yourself as well, and that is also bringing your voice into it, so it’s not one for the other. It doesn’t mean that you have to stand alone and be by yourself, “I can do it all on my own.” But I do think there’s a, I know what my intention was or was not, and I can understand that that’s not how it ended up landing and I got this. Aspirational, ROBIN can tell defensive ROBIN, “I see you defensive ROBIN, thank you for trying to stand up for me, and I got this. I got what I need. I know what I need to do. I know what I was trying to do, it may not have landed. That’s okay. We’ll figure this out.” Get that from the people who can actually provide it to you, and one of those people is yourself.
ROBIN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So tell me as we wrap up, one thing that you think you’re going to do or that you know you’re going to do differently with your team moving forward.
ROBIN: Feed forward. Now, obviously I’m not going to say that, but I think in every, at least team setting, I want to lean into that and create more opportunities for dialogue amongst the team and collaboration amongst the team, because I can see more than just a few benefits of that, and outside of the context of what we’re talking about today, and even more so in the performance and the outcomes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So how are you feeling now relative to the beginning of our conversation?
ROBIN: I feel light. The ton of bricks have been lifted. I mean really, and I think it’s because I truly feel that A, I’ve got it and that I have left the feedback behind.
MURIEL WILKINS: Beautiful. Thank you.
ROBIN: Thank you. Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we think about the challenge Robin was facing and how she might deal with it, there are a few layers to consider. We start with the specific problem that seemed to be at hand, at least at face value, what do I do when I get negative feedback from my team as a leader? But we quickly saw another layer overlaid on top of that, what do I do when the feedback I get, even after careful reflection, doesn’t align with my perspective on the situation? So, Robin has to wrestle with that conflict within herself. When we got more specific about why she wanted to respond to the feedback in a certain way, the conversation went to the idea of authenticity. I encourage ROBIN though, to think not just about feedback, but the idea of feedforward, because ultimately deciding on the right response in these situations isn’t necessarily just about being right. It’s about knowing the audience and taking the action that best aligns with your desired impact. In other words, what do you really want to share and to what end? And in ROBIN’s case, as it is, for many of us, the goal is creating a culture where we can all feel seen, valued and heard. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and that’s a wrap on this season. I have a simple ask of you. If you like this and any episode from this season, please subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts. This is really important so that we can continue to bring you these coaching conversations and so that others can find them as well. While we’re on hiatus, there’s a number of ways we can keep in touch. If you want more on the show, join the Coaching Real Leaders community where I host live discussions on each episode and answer your questions. You can become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me on LinkedIn @Muriel Wilkins, and if you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season, apply at coachingrealleaders.com. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How to Use Your Presence (from Think Fast, Talk Smart)
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Hey, it’s me, Muriel. I’m excited to share with you that we will be back with a new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
in just a few weeks. Meanwhile, I’m excited to share a conversation I had on a podcast I really admire. It’s called
Think Fast, Talk Smart
from Stanford Graduate School of Business. You probably already know it. It’s my go-to podcast for communication in business. If you’ve been listening to
Coaching Real Leaders
, you know that good, clear communication is part of the path forward for many of the leaders I coach. That’s why I was so on board when host Matt Abrahams invited me onto the show to talk about strategies for cultivating a stronger executive presence. It’s a huge part of the coaching I do with leaders, and I think you’ll learn a lot from our conversation. Here it is on
Think Fast, Talk Smart
.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Presence is incredibly important and powerful in communication, but in order to develop a strong presence, you first have to be present with yourself. I’m Matt Abrahams, and I teach strategic communication at Stanford Graduate School of Business. Welcome to
Think Fast, Talk Smart
, the podcast. Today I’m excited to speak with Muriel Wilkins. Muriel is an executive coach, author and podcast host. Along with Amy Su, Muriel wrote the book,
Own the Room: Discover Your Signature Voice to Master Your Leadership Presence
. And she hosts the HBR podcast,
Coaching Real Leaders
. Welcome, Muriel. I am excited for our chat and can’t wait to get started.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m delighted to be here, Matt.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Great. Well, let’s get going. Like me, you’ve been a coach for a number of years. In your coaching experience, what are some of the most common communication pitfalls that leaders fall into and how can we avoid them?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think the ones that I’ve seen folks struggle with or not even be aware of in terms of their communication techniques are threefold. The first is just not having clarity about the outcome they’re looking to achieve through their communication. And so what do you do about that? Spend some time trying to get clear on what it is exactly that you’re trying to get across. The second, which is a common and often talked about, is listening and just having a lack of self-awareness around what it means to listen, am I listening, am I not? So even just starting from that place can really help. And then lastly, I would say it is about checking your assumptions before opening your mouth. So I think a big challenge for people is they just start talking and they haven’t really checked their assumptions. What are their assumptions about themselves, about the other person or the other people or the situation? And are those the assumptions that are going to best serve them in that particular conversation?
MATT ABRAHAMS: So it sounds to me like what makes a lot of sense for leaders to do and anybody to do is really before you enter into an interaction, especially one that’s scheduled and planned, is to really think about what is it I’m trying to get done here and what are the assumptions and ideas I’m bringing that might help or get in the way? And then in the moment, listening becomes really important.
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely. Absolutely. And it doesn’t take as long as most people think. You can do that as you’re walking to a meeting or as you’re just transitioning from one to the other or as you’re getting ready for your day.
MATT ABRAHAMS: And a lot of us are so busy and rushing around, we don’t have time to do what you’re suggesting. And I have found in my own life and the work I do just in teaching or coaching, it helps just to take a moment to reflect on those things. It helps center you and get you present, which I assume also is very helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, absolutely.
MATT ABRAHAMS: In your book
Own the Room
, you emphasize the importance of authentic presence for leaders.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Can you define what you mean by presence and how does communication play a role in building, in showing presence?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. I mean, here’s the thing, everybody has presence. I think the question really is, is A, is it the presence that you want to have? Is this how you want others to experience you? And then secondly, looking specifically at leadership, is it leadership presence? So is your presence one that exudes leadership, regardless of where you fall in the organizational hierarchy? And so when I talk about leadership presence, it really is this ability not only to demonstrate your value and be clear about your message in an authentic way, but also to connect with others. And it’s at that intersection where you can both be credible in terms of what you share as well as relatable because you can connect with others that we have found individuals feel like they are in the presence of a leader. And so that’s what we mean when we talk about having authentic leadership presence.
MATT ABRAHAMS: I love this idea, credible and relatable. So let’s dive into this. What are some things that I can do or a leader can do to establish credibility? I mean, I can come and tell you all these great things I’ve done, but that almost sounds braggadocious, that doesn’t sound like it’s being authentic and relatable. What are things that we can do to demonstrate both credibility and relatability?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. So let’s break those apart. And so for the credibility standpoint, you have to start with how do I add value in this particular interaction? Is it by having a point of view? Is it by listening? Is it by asking questions? So, you prove your credibility or demonstrate credibility by bringing something to the table, and so it really starts by being clear about what it is that you actually bring to that table in that particular venue. And then in terms of communication skills, it’s a lot about of what you talk about, being able to speak in a clear, concise, structured manner. And that takes practice. It’s a skill that anyone can build, but it does take some practice to be able to get there, to be able to talk with that level of preciseness. On the connecting side, listening is the biggest skill. When you think about when others feel heard or valued or understood, it’s usually because somebody has listened to them before they start talking or as they respond. And so that’s really the biggest communication skill that can help on the connecting side.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Listening is so critical. The more and more I do this work, the more listening becomes just essential.
MURIEL WILKINS: Matt, this is why I often say when I talk to my clients or if I’m speaking to groups that when you think about having presence, at the root of it, it’s your ability to be present enough in the moment so that you know what communication skills to use that will help you get to the outcome that you’re looking to get to, whatever that might be. And so, it’s this level of forget the preparation, forget what’s going to happen afterwards, but can you be present enough in the moment? And that present enough in the moment is what allows you to then have presence.
MATT ABRAHAMS: I’m smiling as you say that. It’s one of these things that I should have realized eons ago, but presence I’ve always thought about how others see you, but what you’ve just defined is presence is also about being present so you can respond as necessary. And to me, that was an epiphany that just happened in your presence, so thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: And it’s just as important that you also start with how you experience yourself before you move to so being present is how am I experiencing myself in this moment, and is that what I want it to be or need it to be in order to move the conversation ahead or whatever it might be?
MATT ABRAHAMS: Right. You have to be present so you can have presence.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
MATT ABRAHAMS: So, speaking of presence, imposter syndrome is something that I and a lot of people I coach and teach suffer from. What are your thoughts on imposter syndrome and how can we manage it?
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, my goodness, I have so many thoughts in there forever evolving around imposter syndrome. Imposter syndrome is really this notion of feeling or not feeling like one belongs, whether it’s in a meeting, in a conversation, in a room, in a position. And it’s a little complex because it’s a two-way street. It’s how do I feel in this particular situation and do I feel like I belong? But there’s also the context that you’re in, and does that context make me feel like I belong? But in my work as a coach, and I know, Matt, for you too, I’m always focused on the person that I’m coaching, so if they’re dealing with imposter syndrome, it’s what’s within your control? And part of it is getting out of their own way around the assumptions that they have that they don’t belong, which is what leads to the imposter syndrome. And so, we tend to lift out and redefine it and say, “Well, what would make you feel? What is in your control that would make you feel like you belong at this table?” And it often comes back to this notion of how do I add value? I want to create value, I want to contribute, how do I do that in a way that makes me feel like I am here? Because I am here, right? So imposter syndrome I think is often talked about in terms of like, “Here are the three steps you can take,” but I think it goes back to this fundamental need of we all have a desire to belong, and so we have to define what that looks like for each one of us and then translate that into a meeting setting or a conversational setting, whatever that might be.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Transforming imposter syndrome to being about belonging I think is really, really useful. It allows us to find ways that we can belong, and that can make us feel better and therefore not as if we don’t fit in. I find in my own life, in the work I do, that a lot of imposter syndrome is based on comparing, comparing ourselves to others or comparing ourselves to the standard that we hold in our head for what could or should be. Do you have techniques that help people either find a different comparison or stop comparing altogether?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, I think there’s a quote that says, “Comparison is the thief of joy.” And I fundamentally believe that. Now, doesn’t mean that you don’t pay attention to what’s going on around you. You do pay attention to it. You pay attention. I mean, this is the way the world works, but you can also separate from it and distinguish it. I think a lot of people base their sense of belonging and have it be dependent on others accepting them. Those are two separate things. I can belong somewhere and still not have others accept me. And so I think I try with my clients to get them to understand that there’s a distinction between the two, and let’s focus on your sense of belonging, which really often has nothing to do… If I think about myself as a Black woman walking into a room, I can feel like I don’t belong, but that’s because of what I’ve experienced in the past, yet it’s in my control to say, “Regardless of what people think about me, I belong here.” So it starts with myself. Now, whether they accept me or not, that’s on them. Now let me see if there’s any way I can influence that in a way that still resonates with me and doesn’t feel like I’m selling my soul, but that’s where the work becomes. So I think just distinguishing between the two from a mindset standpoint is very important. And then once you start moving into how do I make sure that I can try to be relevant for this audience, that’s the other way that I try to think about it, then it becomes the communication skills that we’ve talked about, particularly around establishing credibility.
MATT ABRAHAMS: So, this notion of belonging, acceptance, comparison, really important to think about, that those are levers that we can pull and they’re distinct. And it strikes me that we talked a few moments ago about presence, about being present in the moment, but some of the ways we’ve just talked about to manage imposter syndrome are to first distance yourself, reflect on how can I belong? How can I build acceptance? How can I change what and who I compare to? And then go into the situation where you are present. So sometimes being present is key, and sometimes giving yourself a little space and grace can be really helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I mean, Matt, the way I think about it is it is creating space and it’s creating distance between you and the external you and the outcome possibly, which means that you need to go internal, and so it’s being more present to yourself. You don’t lose the presence, it’s being more present to yourself first before you’re present to what’s going on out there.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Thank you for that distinction. Absolutely. I see that, and I appreciate that clarification. You’re exactly right. We have to be present with ourselves, distancing from others at first, and then we can really engage and be present. Thank you. I know framing is something that you feel is very useful in communication. Can you help us understand what you mean by framing and give us some examples of how we can use framing in our communication?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. So I think framing is one of the most powerful communication skills and yet most underutilized ones. Framing is really about setting context. And when I observe my clients, even when they communicate with me, I can count more than I would like the number of times they start sharing without setting context. So why do you need to set context? I mean, the word framing literally comes, it’s like you have a piece of art. The piece of art will resonate with you differently depending on the frame that is around it. So this isn’t about spinning or manipulating the message. The frame is the frame is the frame, it still needs to be true, the data needs to still hold. But the frame that you choose, the context that you choose to introduce whatever it is that you’re presenting is going to help influence how others interpret whatever it is that you’re trying to communicate. And so the types of framing you can use, you can frame your message strategically. That’s particularly helpful if you’re communicating up to those more senior than you. You want to set the context in a way that it’s going to be relevant for whatever business strategy outcomes they’re trying to achieve. Another type of framing is through metaphors or storytelling. You set the context by telling a story or by using a metaphor. What that does is simplify the message and brings it to life for the audience that you’re dealing with. That’s extremely helpful if you’re trying to communicate technical content to a non-technical audience. So framing, all it is about is setting the table and giving it some context rather than just spewing the data out and assuming that they’re going to understand it in the same way that you do.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Framing is critical, I totally agree. And as you said, it’s all about setting context. And framing can come down literally to the language you use. I will talk with people I work with and teach about framing something as a problem versus an opportunity. You can take the same circumstance and frame it one way or the other based on what you think will resonate most with the audience. But you’re so right, people just spew information and they don’t set the context or frame that can help people decipher what’s meant, help give a step forward towards your goal in terms of persuasion or influence. So framing is very critical.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And even framing, what you shared, there’s also should you frame something as an assertion versus a question?
MATT ABRAHAMS: Absolutely. I often talk about feedback as an opportunity to problem-solve. And if you provide feedback as a question, you can reduce defensiveness, you can build engagement. Now, that doesn’t work all the time, but you’re right, assertion versus questioning, very powerful. Like you, many of our listeners find themselves in coaching and mentoring roles. What are some of the techniques that you use to help draw out information from the people you coach and what are some of the techniques you use when providing constructive or counterintuitive guidance and feedback?
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. I’ve been doing this for a very, very long time, coaching that is, almost 20 years. And I find that there’s three particular skills that I really bring to bear in coaching. Number one is the ability to listen, and not just listen for what’s being said, but listen for what are the different interpretations of what could be said so that I can help my clients get awareness. I think secondly, the ability to ask questions. And questions are not in an interrogative way, I think questions that just follow the conversation, open up the conversation really so that my clients can help understand what the choices are in front of them. And then the third, and we get to this point around feedback, but the third is to be able to be direct with them, direct in terms of what I’m hearing, direct around my assessment of how I think they might be interpreting something, direct at times around suggestions that are obviously always their choice in terms of what to do. But direct enough. I’m not a coach who stays in listening and asking questions all the time. I will provide suggestions, but as I here said sometimes, it’s my suggestions, their decision, what they want to do. And so when it comes to feedback, I think what’s particularly helpful is using the skill of framing, right? It’s providing the feedback in a way that is going to be relevant to them, that is going to resonate with them. And so I often ground my feedback in something that they may have mentioned already, in something that they say is important to them or something that I know is coming up that is of value to them.
MATT ABRAHAMS: It sounds like you’re doing a lot of work, and it sounds like some of that work you do in advance, but some you’re adjusting and adapting in the moment. Well, Muriel, I would be missing a huge opportunity if I didn’t ask for your expert coaching advice like you do on your Coaching Real Leaders podcast. Would you be willing to coach me on a challenge that I often face?
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely.
MATT ABRAHAMS: My challenge is having trouble setting boundaries and saying no. I say yes way too often and get myself in trouble because I then have too much to do. How would you help me in that circumstance?
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let me ask you a question, how does that help you to say yes all the time?
MATT ABRAHAMS: I have learned in my life that when I say yes, good things can happen, and I have benefited from being willing to take risks and to explore opportunities. The downside is it swamps me in terms of the things I have to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Yeah. And so on the downside, what is it that you would say no to in hindsight?
MATT ABRAHAMS: There are many things that I have taken on that turned out to be much more work than I expected or turned out to be false starts that didn’t lead to anything. I don’t want to say they were a waste of time because I think I learned something from them, but had I had an opportunity to make that choice again, I would definitely choose a different answer than the yes that I gave.
MURIEL WILKINS: Then what would’ve helped you make that choice?
MATT ABRAHAMS: I think honestly just taking a moment to reflect, and I think the reflection is to really think about how much is involved and the struggle and prioritization I would have to do if I really took this on. I am somebody who gets really excited about potential opportunities, and I often don’t take the time to think about the consequences of like, “Oh, this would be really cool, but you know what? It’s going to take a lot of time and it’s going to mean you’re not going to be able to do these other things that you’ve either committed to or excited about.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, what I hear you saying, Matt, is maybe expanding from I get excited about a lot of things to am I getting excited about the right things at the right time? And so the excitement is not in question, right? We want to keep that going. But maybe it’s taking some space to really define for yourself for a period of time, for a season, what are the right things that I want to pour that excitement into, and how much time do I want to pour into them? And that can change year to year. In fact, I advise many of my clients to take stock of that periodically, and that is prioritizing, basically. So I think overlaying it with priorities will then help give you a filter and a framework for what do I say yes to and what do I say no to in a responsive way rather than in a reactive way, which your default reaction is yes. Right? So if you have those two columns right in front of you, it can help then structure your thinking about it as those situations come up.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Thank you. You helped me see something that I think will be transformative. I’ve been looking at the world as binary, yes or no, but what I heard from you, what really clicked in my mind, this notion of not yet. So maybe it’s not a no, but it’s not now. That will be helpful to think of set timeframes, and maybe something that’s really exciting to me I simply say, “Great, but not now. Maybe I look at that later.” And adding is a choice, so it’s not yes, no, it’s yes, no and not now. That will help me. Thank you. You are really good at this. So before we end, Muriel, I’d like to ask you the same three questions I ask everyone who joins me. Are you up for that?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure.
MATT ABRAHAMS: All right. Question number one, if you were to capture the best communication advice you ever received as a five to seven word presentation slide title, what would it be?
MURIEL WILKINS: Leadership is about asking the right questions, not having the right answer.
MATT ABRAHAMS: It’s about asking the right questions, not having the right answers. And that really turns what many of us think about leadership on its head. We think people expect us to have the right answers, but in fact, asking those questions is more powerful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Question number two, who is a communicator you admire, and why?
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, my goodness, there are so many, but I’m just going to go with who’s popping up in my mind right now. It’s Pema Chodron. She is a writer, a spiritual teacher, a speaker, a meditation teacher, and the reason she’s popping up in my mind is she is able to take what I consider what can feel complex in terms of content, and topics that can feel very out of touch, and simplify them in a way that you get the message. And she does that through storytelling. And when you hear her speak, there is a level of presence in terms of being present in the moment that is palpable, that I think enables her to do that in such an authentic way that I find very, very powerful.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Wonderful. The ability to be present, the ability to make complex information accessible are true gifts to the audience, and that’s wonderful. Final question, question number three. What are the first three ingredients that go into a successful communication recipe?
MURIEL WILKINS: Number one, clarity. Number two, relevance, particularly to the audience, but also for yourself. And number three, I couldn’t leave this one out, presence.
MATT ABRAHAMS: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. What I like about all three of your suggestions is they apply to the audience, right? Clarity, relevance and presence, you need that for your audience, but you also need it for yourself. Excellent. Very, very helpful. As was everything you shared, Muriel, thank you so much for joining us. Thank you for providing insights into communication, leadership and presence. And personally, thank you for helping me with a challenge that I have.
MURIEL WILKINS: I hope you enjoyed my conversation with Matt Abrahams. I know I did. If you want to listen to more of
Think Fast, Talk Smart
, you can find it wherever you get your podcasts. And stay tuned for a new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
coming soon. Until then, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Do I Move Forward from a Career Setback?
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months. But on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Jeff to protect his confidentiality. Jeff started his career path working in various business roles, but would leave the jobs after some time.
JEFF: I felt like I was reaching a point of stagnating, and also, I was going through the motions a bit. There was a situation where I was passed over for promotion and taking over the team. Looking up the chain, I didn’t really see much upside for me, so I just felt like I needed to do something to make a change, because I think I’ve had tendency maybe to just stay in places for too long.
MURIEL WILKINS: He then went on to get his MBA, and used that to transition his career into a new industry.
JEFF: I was sort of interested in the more dynamic nature of the industry. The industry that I was previously in was much more mature, so things were much more steady state. I was sort of also interested generally just the general interest in the field. So one of the reasons why I went to pursue my MBA was to try to facilitate that transition a little bit easier, and so I kind of zeroed down on a couple of potential industries that I wanted to pursue. Part of it was also just wanting to leave, to just move away from what I was doing in the past. So that’s how I kind of landed there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jeff reached out, because while things were going well for him in the organization he joined, he has recently felt some setbacks in his career. But before getting into that, I wanted to hear more about why he chose this particular role.
JEFF: It was probably one of my short lists of top companies I wanted to work for. But I think what really sealed the deal for me was the manager that I would be working for and the org leader. I really felt like just culturally, it felt really aligned and it felt like I could fit in, and they recognized the strengths that I brought to the table. So that was a big draw for me. When I met with the team, I felt really comfortable much more so than in the past.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So what’s your experience been so far?
JEFF: The first couple years were good. I felt like I transitioned successfully and I did well. The work was interesting. Still stressful for me, but I felt like it was mostly positive. I did end up getting promoted on a slightly quicker timeline than typical, and eventually built a team of five to oversee our footprint of investments globally. But in the past year, I feel like things have sort of shifted the other direction. I think a number of factors kind of played into it. I think one, I was actually starting to feel quite burned out, because I was really pushing for the promo and to try to get more scope and responsibility. And then I think there was some circumstantial things that came into play as well. So a lot of my folks above in my chain took different roles. So my direct manager, who was a big sponsor and supporter for me, took another role. My skip level took another role, and then the org leader retired. So there was a lot of new leadership coming in. And personally, my dad was going through a recurrence of his cancer, so we were working through that. So, it was a challenging time for me. So, I began to see both my performance decline, but I felt unsuccessful both in asking for and receiving the support that I needed through this time, but also building trust with the new leadership that I had. So slowly my team began to be reduced. I lost part of my team. They hired some additional managers in the space, began taking away some of my analysts. My scope was sort of divvied up. And then at the start of this year, they took the rest of my team away, and then I was converted back to an individual contributor. And that was the point where I felt like the last straw for me had kind of broke, and I felt like I hit sort of a low point in this arc in my career and really had to look at the situation and reassess, was just unexpectedly given the news that my team was going to be taken away and I was going to be converted to an IC. And I took the rest of the day off. I went to a separate room, a house. I sat on the bench and looked out the window, and I just started crying because I just felt all of emotion from just having invested so much and tried to push through. And it just felt like a relationship kind of gone sour. And so that kind of prompted me to really think about just reassessing everything. Did I have the right priorities in my life and relative to my work? Did I overinvest in this path that didn’t necessarily lead to the outcome that I wanted? And then whether or not this was a place for me or even the career path for me. I also feel like a little bit of a deja vu. Not deja vu, but I felt some similar feelings where I hit walls in the past and it made me think about, I don’t know if I navigate my career that well. And I felt like maybe some of that played into my lack of success in the past year. That’s kind of where I was at, and I felt like at that point, where it’d be helpful to get some coaching, and some feedback, and process through, and how to proceed next.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. All right. Thank you for that context and bringing me up to speed as to where you are now. So what I’m hearing from you is a couple of things. One is feeling like you’re in this pattern of hitting a wall in your career, and that’s leading you to kind of reassess, is there possibly a different way to go about navigating your career? I’m also very much hearing from you and also sensing this notion of being at a low point. So we want to determine, what do we mean by low point and where do we go from here? Right?
JEFF: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then that there has been a lot circumstantially that has changed. Your leadership changed, sponsor that was supporting you, changed. Your role has changed. Whether that’s a result of that or a result of other things we don’t know, but we’ll try to work into that. And you’ve also had a lot, it sounds like some pretty significant things going on personally with your dad being sick. So, I just want to acknowledge that there are a lot of questions in there. And the reality of it is, it’s not simple. And so that’s the place that we’re starting from. We’re not starting with an easy, simple math problem. Which means, that we’re not going to try to approach it as though it’s an easy, simple math problem, and just think that all we have to do is do two plus two and then get the answer on the other side. It’s probably more… Excuse my lack of math aptitude, but it’s probably more advanced calculus. Or even worse for me, trigonometry, advanced trigonometry. I never understood why we had to study that, but here we are. Okay? All right. So you’ve propped up the questions that are swirling through your head, that you’re sitting with. What would make you feel like you are at a different point than you are now? You self-assessed that you feel you’re at a low point. What would make you feel that you’re further along? Whatever that means.
JEFF: I don’t know. I think internally, I think feeling like I have some clarity about where I’m headed. I think right now, I feel quite directionless, but also just having some sense of congruence with what I’m doing, with who I am. Because I don’t know if I feel that my path that I’ve been on these 15 plus years is really aligned to myself. I don’t know, it’s just hard. It’s hard for me to differentiate what are things that are just part of all paths have pros and cons and challenges that come with it, versus what is something that’s really cutting against the grain for me. Having had the setback has forced me to think about that a bit. Is it just a trial for me to work through or is this a signal for me to maybe pursue a different path? I think I would feel much more positive if I had better sense of that. Because definitely, I want to lean into being authentic to myself and having intention with where I’m headed, and I’m not sure, so not having some clarity around that. I took the things that happened as a vote of no confidence from the new leadership. If it had been something different where I had kept my team or maybe I took a slightly different scope but still had similar types of responsibilities, I think I would’ve felt much more like I’m moving along the path that I thought I was headed. So yeah, I don’t know if that answered your question or not.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Whatever you say answers my question. Okay. Let’s get a little tactical here, because I’m curious about certain things. So, first of all, let me just say, you said one of the things you’re trying to figure out is given this wall that you feel you’ve hit from a career standpoint, is it a signal that you should just keep on working through it, or is it a signal that you should move on, or move forward? What I would ask you in this moment right now because you’re still in the role, so you haven’t made a decision, is what would it look like if it were both? If it were, It’s a signal that I need to work through this and that I need to figure out how to move forward.
JEFF: That makes sense to me. I think it’s been a couple months since this happened, and I have been trying to work through it and my relationship with some of my… Because I’ve had more conversations with them, and at some points it hit a really low point in our relationship where we’re both very frustrated with each other. It has since sort of improved. But I feel like there are learnings for me just even going through this and trying to work through it. I do see merits, practically as well. There were points where I was just ready to submit my two weeks notice without much of a plan, but I’ve been talked off by folks that I trust. But yeah, I do think there’s things for me to learn through this. And because I don’t know exactly how I want to proceed yet next, it does seem that there’s some prudence to kind of work through both. One piece of feedback that I’ve received was, I’m looking for clarity before taking action, but sometimes you have to take some action to get clarity. And I feel like I’m trying to just work through both, I suppose.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Okay. So I’m just going to hold that. You don’t sound totally convinced, but I think that you’re in a position where really, I mean, what other option do you have right now but to look at both, right? Because you’re still there, you haven’t made a decision, and you’re in the state of ambivalence. And so when you’re in a state of ambivalence, you are where you are. I do think you’re in this situation, when you think about should I work through it, you’re sort of exemplifying wherever you go, there you are. Meaning you’ve switched jobs a couple of times. And it hasn’t been the same circumstance, but you’ve described each time similarly in terms of hitting a wall. Hitting a wall, feeling burned out, feeling like you need to move away from something. And there’s a difference between moving away from something, and moving towards something. And I’m sensing that’s a bit of the shift that would help break this pattern that you’ve been in. You already know what it feels like to move away from something. Bad culture or a culture that doesn’t feel right to you, a workload that’s too much for you, lack of interest in the content. Now, difference in scope, different in circumstances. So what I’m not hearing so much is, what will you be moving towards? And so we’ll need to get some clarity on that. Okay? But in the meantime, there is this question of, what lessons can you learn? Which you came to. And kudos to you, you’ve recognized you keep hitting this wall. So what is it that I am doing that’s contributing to this? And notice I didn’t say, “What is it that I’m doing wrong?” It’s more, “What am I doing that’s contributing?” Not causing, but contributing potentially to this outcome that I keep having. And I think that’s where we can start exploring before we move to what’s next, how do I align, how do I have congruency? And all of that. If not, just a relationship as the statistics say, right? You move on from the relationship and guess what? You end up in the same predicament most times in the next one because you just go in the same shape and form and expectations, yet expecting different results. And then wherever you go, there you are. Okay? In terms of lessons learned. One of the things you said is you feel like the most recent actions in terms of your scope being decreased and you being returned into an individual contributor role, you took that as a vote of no confidence from the new leadership team. Team. So that’s your assessment. All right? Have you asked for any clarity or evidence that led to that decision around your scope being decreased, that either supports or doesn’t support this hypothesis you have that it’s a vote of no confidence?
JEFF: I have had a number of conversations about it, because it was kind of a gradual process where they can’t bring in new folks, and then moving part of my team under them. I’ve seen signals both ways. So, on one hand, it was more about maybe the scope was too large for one person or that I was overwhelmed. So that would be a signal maybe slightly different than a vote of confidence perhaps. But I have also had conversations particularly kind of more recently in the last couple months where I think there were some questions about my performance. More in the recent months. So, I agreed to some, but not necessarily everything. So, I think I feel like my sense is, and I know I bring my own sort of lens to it, but my sense is that they didn’t think I was ready for the scope or the team that they were envisioning as they were growing. I think initially when the new leads were coming in, they recognized a lack of resources in this space. And that has sort of shifted a little bit to adding folks at a similar level as me, and then spreading out the resources. So, it’s hard to say because I’ve asked them more specifically for feedback and how things are going from their perspective. But I think mostly, I’ve just given answers not necessarily about me, but reading between the lines. And recent conversations suggest that’s at least partly, I think there’s questions around if I’m capable already.
MURIEL WILKINS: It can be hard to face setbacks. But Jeff was able to get very candid with me, and even more importantly, with himself here, which is important if he wants to learn from the situation. And while the temptation is to either blame ourselves or others for our circumstances, it’s critical that we hold a both and perspective to really understand what’s at play. In Jeff’s case, I don’t have the opportunity to talk to the people who work with him to get a fuller sense of what’s going on as I would with coaching clients I work with over the course of several months. So, I don’t really have a sense of how he’s perceived by others or the broader organizational context. It’s hard to say whether his career is being impacted solely as a reflection of his performance or whether it’s a reflection of the organizational changes. And it would be irresponsible for me as a coach to speculate one way or the other. What I did want to introduce to Jeff though, was that it could be both. It’s important to look at any career situation contextually so that he can then start to see what is or isn’t in his control. Let’s jump back in as we start to work through this reframe. You said, “I see this as a vote of no confidence from leadership.” And I would tweak this a little bit to say, what if you looked at it from the perspective of, I see this as a vote of no confidence from leadership, given where the organization is at this time, and where it needs to go in the foreseeable future. And so if you look at it from that perspective, what does it change, if anything, for you?
JEFF: I think it takes some of the heaviness off, or some of the pressure off. And it helps maybe zoom out a little bit. So, focus is not just on me, but also what’s going on in the organization. Thinking about it, I think it is probably a combination of both factors. It’s not necessarily all about a result of what I’ve done or not done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I think that’s important to understand. Again, I’m not absolving like you, and we’re going to get to what could you have done. But I think it’s important to look at it from a broader picture, from a context standpoint. That whatever it is that you did or did not do, combined with what was happening contextually, did not lead up to the outcome. I know we talked a little bit about math earlier. In this particular case, the math is not mapping. The combination of you plus the organizational context did not equal what Jeff had in mind as success and what he had planned out his next career move was going to be. That’s all it is. Okay?
JEFF: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: All the other factors that you have into it, how you feel about it, and a disappointment, and it’s a low point, understandably so. But I think there’s part of it that you can own, and then there’s another part of it that is just not necessarily in your control. So, let’s focus on the stuff that you can own. And so the stuff you can own, we can look back and do a little bit of hindsight 2020. Let’s play that game. Okay? If you look back at this particular situation, what if anything do you think you could have done that would’ve led to a different outcome? And correct me if I’m wrong. I’m assuming for you, the positive outcome would’ve been you retained a role where you had your team, and even potentially your team would’ve expanded. Is that right?
JEFF: I think so, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what do you think you could have done differently that would have led to that outcome?
JEFF: I think there are probably two things that I wish maybe could have been done better. I think the first is I wasn’t clear in myself, and I think that maybe translated to the ask being less clear to the leadership. I did need additional support at the time, a lot of stuff that was going on. So, I think if I would’ve done it over, I would’ve been much more direct and clear about what I could or could not do during this season of my life, and probably would’ve asked to take on a slightly different scope, or at least temporarily maybe even reducing my scope temporarily, or asking for additional support. Part of my frustration I think was I was trying to ask for it, but I wasn’t really getting what I needed. There were a lot of new people coming in. They were sort of also relying on me for legacy knowledge in this space. And so, I don’t think I was successful asking for what I needed during that season. The second thing I think I probably would’ve put more focus on is actually spending more of my bandwidth building relationship with the new leads. I think I was really focused on trying to keep the ship afloat through the change, and also with what’s going on with myself. I didn’t prioritize spending time with our new org leader as much, and trying to build the relationship and the trust more intentionally. So they formed their opinions over time or impressions over time in the absence of that. So those are probably two things I would’ve done differently, or hopefully I wish I had done maybe a little bit better.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think these are big critical lessons learned, Jeff, right? One is I need to ask for what I need. I need to ask for support, when I need it, not before it’s too late. And new leadership comes in, I need to gain their trust. And that means spending time with them to build relationship. Those two are just critical, even when not in crisis mode. If what you had come with today is, Hey, I just want some tips on how to lead and manage my career effectively, those would be in there. So, they’re just good career management, hygiene. So one of the things I want you to take away is no matter where you are, no matter where you go, this aspect of being clear around, what is it that I can do? What is it that I can’t do? If there are things I can’t do, do I have the capacity to ask for support? Or is it just something that needs to be delegated? Or is it something that just isn’t going to get done? But being in question around that rather than assuming you have to do it all is key.
And then secondly, always looking around and saying, “Who are the key stakeholders?” And if the seats on the deck have moved around, honor those who have left, maintain the relationship with those who are not in the leadership seat anymore or the sponsor seat anymore. But now, it’s time to cultivate relationship with the new folks. So, whether in crisis mode or whether it’s peace time, and everything’s stable and there are no changes happening, this is just a good MO to have. Would it have guaranteed that your scope didn’t change?
JEFF: No, I don’t think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: No. Nothing that we do guarantees an outcome. So, I think the question is not necessarily, “What could I have done differently?” The question is, “What’s the best effort that I can put in that moves me closer to the outcome that I would like, understanding that there are other things that are going to weigh in? But I’m going to put my best effort in.” And so my best effort is to ask for support. My best effort is to not just be heads down on getting the work done, but also lift my head up, and intentionally, strategically cultivate the relationships that I need to cultivate. So that when I reach this point, the point that you’re at, Jeff, you can look back and say, “You know what? This isn’t the outcome that I wanted, and I tried my best.” And that’s going forward too. Right? You try your best and then you see what happens. So, I think you’re walking away at least from this situation, if and when you walk away, armed with some things that you can put into action. Now it’s on you. If you don’t put them into action, your sort of know where that road can lead to. In your past roles, not this most recent one, but the other past, if you had applied these two lessons, do you think it would’ve made any difference for you?
JEFF: I think it would have. I feel like I’ve inconsistently done these things through my career, and it was less limiting when I was more junior. But obviously as I began to grow more scope and responsibilities, it’s become much more limiting or much more of the obvious critical thing for me. So, I do think it would’ve made a difference in terms of my progression in some of my past roles. One thing that I’m learning, I had a discussion with my new manager. And this wasn’t a comment directed towards me, but we were talking about something else, about playing the game. Don’t be upset if you don’t play the game. And I don’t really like the notion of playing a game, but I do think there’s some truth to it. There’s things that you need to do or should do. And I don’t think I’ve ever really thought about it in the past very intentionally about that. I was very much focused on doing good work, being a good business partner, those type of things. But the spoken and unspoken rules of engagement to progress your career, I’ve not thought about as much. Not intentionally not thinking about it, but that’s not something I’ve been given guidance or taught in the past. I never really thought about it. But I feel like that was a big part of what was missing and the things that I could control mean. When I joined, I think there were a lot of things circumstantially to my benefit, a strong manager that sponsored me. We were in a growing period of the company, and then things changed. What I’m trying to take away from the experiences, how did I be more intentional about that piece? And as you mentioned, I have to take this in normal times and crisis times wherever I go. I’m also sort of wondering if I want to play the game. The rules have changed a little bit, right? With a leadership structure, it’s like, do I still want to be a part of this, or is this something that I have to set in other roles going into the future?
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Jeff, look. I love the fact that you were like, “Hey, I can acknowledge that I didn’t do these things because I didn’t really know.” It’s not something that you had gotten guidance on before. You didn’t need to before because circumstances were in place that it wasn’t necessary. It’s kind of a great codependent relationship, where you don’t even have to learn these areas because somebody else is taking care of it. They’re making it okay that you don’t have to do these things. And then circumstance changes. And what it reveals… Which is not a bad thing. I mean, if you take it from a perspective of you want to learn, what it reveals are the areas that you still have to grow in. They were there all along. It’s just that this situation revealed them more than other situations you’ve been in. And then the other previous jobs, the route you took, instead of saying, “Hey, I need to learn these.” You were like, “You know what? I’m out. I’m going to move on to the next.” And then guess what? The lessons were still there to be learned, but it took some time. So now you realize, Oh shoot, I never really learned these skills. It’s a matter of learning them. And then the second question becomes, which is what you just raised, But do I want to? Do I want to do this? Do I want to have to cultivate relationships with new leadership, and get them to trust me, and have to gain credibility with them and manage a huge scope that I continuously have to look at? Do I need to ask for resources and navigate asking for resources? And the answer is no, you don’t have to. However, if you want to lead at a certain level, that is part of leading. And so, it’s not a judgment of good or bad, or you have to, you have not. What’s interesting to me is that these two areas that you have talked about, like being heads down, focusing on doing good work, being a good business partner, and not as much focused or deprioritizing the relationship building that may need to happen with other stakeholders, or the resource allocation or reallocation. What you have leaned more into is more of an individual contributor posture. And then, you were actually put into an individual contributor role. So there is a bit of, how you positioned yourself is aligned with where you ended up.
JEFF: Yeah, I think you’re right. That’s actually really helpful to hear. My approach and my posture or actions, I think it aligns to this characteristic of an IC. Part of it I think is trying to make that shift also from IC to leadership, or more managing. And I think obviously, it’s much more familiar to me in my past roles, and my zone of comfort is there. And so part of it’s trying to shift a little bit and pick up a different set of skills as I seek to progress in the more leadership positions,
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. So again, it’s with no judgment am I saying that. Because you could say, “You know what? Yeah, you’re right. Being an IC is actually what I like.” Going to your second question, which is what is most aligned and congruent with who I am? You might say, “You know what? I don’t want to spend my time doing that. That’s not what energizes me. That’s not what I see as my career. I don’t want to be responsible or have the burnout implications of managing at a larger scope.” And that’s fine. That’s your personal decision. Or you could say, “You know what? I do want the larger scope. I do want to be a manager. That’s aligned with where I see my career going for whatever reason.” And therefore, rather than looking at it as playing the game, it’s how do I operate on that court? What are the skills that I need to have to operate on that field? It’s no different than… One of my kids played competitive tennis. And it was like when you played regional, you only needed to know how to do these things. But when you went to nationals, it was a whole different ball field. But you have to decide, do you want that? Because if you want that, then your training looks different. The skills you learn are amplified, the mental game is different. But you can’t have it both ways. It boils down to, what is it that you want? Which is very different than what is it that I don’t want, which is what you’ve been doing, right? You’ve been walking away from challenges like, I don’t want that. Let me just fall into the next one. Okay?
JEFF: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think now that you’re at a crossroads of what is it that you want, that decision doesn’t need to be permanent. But if you have clarity around what it is that you want, then we can determine, okay, well what are some of the things that you need to learn, which I think you’ve already identified. And there’s no guarantee that it’s going to be easy to learn them, but that’s completely up to you. And so as I say all that, this question of what is it that you want, how does that land with you?
JEFF: I think what you said resonates with me a lot. I think it makes a lot of sense to me. I don’t know if it’s just because I’m in the moment now, but I feel like I don’t know if… It’s what I thought I wanted over the last four or five years. That’s been my pursuit. And I’m kind of at the point where I’m kind of taking a step back. It’s like, Is this really what I want? I don’t know. I think I still do. I don’t know if I’m naturally good at those things that we had talked about as key for leading an org, building influence, and those type of things. And that’s where I’m struggling a little bit with just personally, just trying to think through, I don’t know if those come that naturally for me. But on the other hand, the problems that I get to solve at those levels are very interesting to me. There’s a strong desire for me to scale sort of my impact in a positive way. And I can’t necessarily do that as much as an IC. And so those are what I’m trying to weigh, and I have this desire in this hand, and then needing to develop the skills, and really learn what I need to develop. So I think this experience has taught me things, like the gaps that I’ve had.
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand. I understand fully, okay? First of all, not all leadership skills are going to come naturally to you. I have yet to meet somebody where everything just comes naturally to them. People will look like it does, but they practice. They work on it. Okay? I think the question is, are you coachable in them? Can you learn them enough? But we’ll go back to your ability to learn them has to be supported because you want to, because it leads to an outcome that you would like to go after. We’ve touched on some really important points in this session with Jeff so far. Because he was able to admit that he was concerned about what was happening at his job, we were able to work through what he currently thinks and feels about his situation and how he might reframe that. Jeff wanted to explore what skills he needs to be able to sustain his career progression. And while skills are important in the area that most people feel they need to lean into, it’s not only critical to identify them. It’s also vital that you ask yourself whether you truly are committed to working on them. Without the motivation to do so, it can make your situation even more difficult than need be. So, with Jeff, I was curious about why he even wanted to further develop his leadership skills and lean into his desire to be a leader. The reality of it is you find the content and the impact that you can make at the leadership level very appealing. It’s what attracts you. You look at that and you’re like, “That’s the type of impact I want to make. That’s the type of work I want to be doing.” But then there’s a part of you that’s like, “Yeah, but I don’t want to do the other stuff.” The other stuff that’s part of it. That’s not reality, that’s fantasy. I wish I could tell you, “You don’t have to do it.” And maybe you can find a company or you can start your own company where that’s the case. But in terms of where you are now, that formula doesn’t work here. And for the most part, there’s always going to be elements of what you do that don’t come naturally to you, that are a little bit more uncomfortable, that you have to learn, that are not your favorite thing to do. The question becomes, is it worth it? Is it worth it? It’s like that basketball player. I think it’s Michael Jordan I think, or LeBron James, or Kobe Bryant. I don’t know. One of them. You’ll probably correct me. The one who would be out shooting all night, past midnight, over and over and over and over again, while the teammates were off doing whatever they were doing, over and beyond. Because that was the one area or part of their game that they needed to hone in on. And I can’t answer, nobody can answer that for you, Jeff. You have to say, “Is it worth it?” Is the learning these skills and practicing these skills, even though they feel against the grain to you right now, even though they feel uncomfortable right now, is it worth it to you? But as long as you stay in the, “I want this, but I wish I didn’t have to do that,” all you’re doing is resisting the reality of things, and that’s keeping you at your low point. I’m not in any ways pushing you to answer the question now, but I think these are the questions that you need to sit with.
JEFF: Yeah, I think that that’s helpful. I don’t know if I know the answer for me. I think the answer is yes, but I think it takes some reflection. Because I feel like processing it. Yeah, the question if it’s worth it, when I think back about the different roles and companies I’ve taken, I feel like was motivated by things over really reflecting on what’s authentic for me. My first role was, it was really about I didn’t know what I wanted to do. So the company that gave me the highest offer, and it sounded like the most prestigious, went there. And it wasn’t for me. So I don’t know, maybe I’m just rambling and processing aloud.
MURIEL WILKINS: I process out loud clearly.
JEFF: Yeah, I’m an internal processor. So, the way you phrased the question, I think is a helpful thing to think about. What is it that I am seeking after, and is this still worth it for me?
MURIEL WILKINS: I think in you thinking through that question, you’ve mentioned the words authentic to you a few times. Let me just offer something here. There’s a difference between a skill coming naturally to you, or not feeling uncomfortable, or not being hard, and you being authentic to you. People get those confused. They think being authentic just means everything that I’m doing feels easy to me. Being authentic to you means being true to you, whatever true to you means at this moment. At that moment, when you took that job earlier on, and it was because it paid good money and it was a good role, you were being true to yourself. You wanted good money and you wanted to work for a brand name company. That’s what was true to you then. But maybe your truth is different now, and I think that’s what you need to determine. Not so much what are the skills. Those are important, but I would start with, what feels true to me now? What feels aligned with what’s important to me right now? On the inside, not just on the outside. The outside needs to be a reflection of what’s important to you on the inside. And I think what you’ve been operating with is, yes, there are certain things that are important to you on the outside. Good paying job, prestige, whatever. All the things that we can get entrapped by. And now it’s like, “But is it really aligned with what’s important to me on the inside?” But I haven’t yet heard from you what’s important to you internally. What moves you? What energizes you? What is purposeful for you? What gives meaning? And I think that’s where the tension is. So that’s where the authenticity is going to come. The authenticity is going to come when what you deem important to you in terms of values and what provides meaning is aligned with what you’re doing on the outside. In terms of job, role, organization. And even when you are activating some of the skills or learning some of the skills that you deem don’t come to you naturally, like building relationship with senior level leaders, it’s okay that they don’t come naturally to you. It’s okay that they’re hard, because they are in service of something that you give meaning to, something that’s important to you. If what’s important to you is… I’m just going to make something up. If what’s important to you at this point in time is, I want to be able to have… you were talking about your dad, right? Let’s say it’s, I want to be able to have time with my dad. Okay, so you asking for support is in service of that. You saying, “I’m going to have a role with more of an individual contributor scope. I’m going to take a managerial job, but at a different organization that’s not as larger scope,” is in service of that. I’m making that up, but I’m just trying to amplify what the link looks like.
JEFF: Yeah, this resonates me with me a lot. I like the thought of separating the skills from being authentic. So I think I’ve always held this internal belief that because certain things felt like I was pushing against the grain a little bit, maybe this is not the path for me. So it’s actually helpful for me to reframe how I think about authenticity, which is more in line with inner values, or my values and my priorities. Because I’m very introverted by nature. And so I think one of the challenges when I first entered the workforce, I was very uncomfortable in presentations and those types of things. So I think I always question whether those were paths for me. And I kind of just stuck with it by virtue of defaulting to grit and hard work. But it’s helpful to think of it that way. I mean, these are skills that I’ve gradually developed over time. I’m not still the most charismatic person you’ll ever meet. But yeah, I think it’s helpful to think of it that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I think it’s just that it comes down to what do you want to honor the most, right? Even if you said, for example, “Hey, I’m introverted and I want to honor that. I actually cherished that about myself.” I mean, the book
Quiet
was phenomenal in terms of unleashing the power of those who tend to be a bit more quieter or who are introverts. If you want to fully embrace that, that’s fine. Let that be the starting point. But then it’s like, okay, so what does that mean in terms of what I want to do, rrather than the other way around. And I also want to be a realist. I could sit here and say, “My most fundamental value is that I want to win.” And then I decide the way I want to express that is to be a professional basketball player. Well, it doesn’t matter how much I practice, to be honest. I will be able to play up to a certain level, but at some point I have to say yes, even though I might excel, I have relative to those who can reach the WNBA or the NBA, I have limitations, maybe my height, or just my dexterity, or my mobility, or my age what or whatnot. And okay, I get that, but I’m still fulfilling my purpose up until a certain level. So, you also want to be realistic. And there’s a thin line between when are you leading and living according to what you see as your purpose and what brings you meaning versus just chasing, because that’s what you’re used to doing. So it’s just an inversion. When you can sit with these questions and ask yourself, Okay, what is important to me? What do I value? And if these are the things I value, what are the skills that I want to learn? And do I want to learn them? Is it worth it to me” Then the next question becomes, Is this the place where I can do it? And is this the place where I want to do it? Right? It’s both a can and a want. Because it might be that you say, “You know what, Muriel?” You might call me up a couple weeks from now, a couple months from now and say, “You know what? I want to go full throttle in learning, get out of my comfort zone and cultivating these senior leadership. I’m going to try to do it. The question is, can I do it here?” I don’t know. Do you still have access to those leaders? Are you positioned in a place where you can do it? And if you can, great. Yeah, why not try to learn it? If not, then it may be time to find opportunities where you get another at bat around that. So, I think part of it, Jeff, is sometimes we tend not to look at… Going back to your metaphor around relationships, we tend to not look at relationships, even work ones, as places that give us an opportunity to learn. We go there to succeed. And another aspect of it is there are also places to learn. And maybe one of the metrics you can use is, is this not only a place where I can succeed, but does this place have the right conditions to allow me to learn the things that I want to learn, and that I need to learn? Which is very different, that every time a lesson learned comes up to say, “Time to go.”
JEFF: Yeah, these are good questions, I think, for me to ponder. I think just my intuitive sense as we’re talking is that, you described it as sort of chasing versus being driven by your purpose. I do think there’s some of the chasing piece that I’m trying to shed, but I do think this is a path I still want to pursue. There are definitely things about, as I’m kind of thinking about, not just the needs I’m not good at, but I think there’s definitely things, I think, that I really enjoyed about building and leading a team. Particularly around building team culture with psychological safety, and then bring different perspectives as an introvert, or in the way that I think about things. That is part of why I kind of want to progress in leadership is build these more positive cultures on teams. The question of, can I do it here, and where can I learn here, I think is a good one. I think there’s still an opportunity. I think I still have touch points and access to the senior leaders, and there is an opportunity here, so that’s something for me to think about. I don’t know if I still want want to be here, because I’ve also been here for some time, so it might be a good chance for me to go to a place where I can also learn different things as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Thinking about it from that perspective, whether you go or you stay, how are you going to approach it, is much more proactive than reactive. The reactive is, “I’m just trying to get away from the situation.” The proactive is, “What’s the situation that I’m trying to now create given what’s already happened?” Okay? So it’s an acceptance of where you are now, as hard as it might have been. It’s an acceptance of it. That’s the reality of it. Doesn’t mean being passive. Being passive is doing nothing. Active acceptance is saying, “Okay, it is what it is. I see it for what it is, now how do I want to move forward?” And you have options versus defaulting. So, let’s try to recap a little bit. I feel like where we’ve gotten to rather than a to-do list for you of, “Here are the three steps you can take.” I think your to-do list is probably some questions that you need to sit with further and to work through further, and that’s okay, right? That just means that there’s more opening that needs to happen for you. And so, I just would love to hear two things. The first is, how do you feel now at the end of our conversation versus when we first got started? And secondly, if you had to sit with two or three questions over the next couple of weeks, and we assume that you and I were meeting in a couple of weeks, and I let you choose which questions you wanted to work on, what would those be? So let’s start with the first one. How are you feeling now versus when we first started this coaching session?
JEFF: I feel good. I feel more positive. I feel like I have a broadened perspective on my situation. You’ve brought some things that I haven’t thought about and that perspective before, which I find helpful. So yeah, I feel good. I feel kind of motivated to take the next steps. On the two to three questions, I think for me, the first question is… And I think I have a good sense of it, but I think whether my values and priorities today that would reflect being authentic to where I’m at now, and kind of thinking through what those would be. And then I think the second question would be, am I able to do those things in my current role and current place? And then my third question would be, if not, what would the other options look like?
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s great. That’s great, Jeff, because I think your default has been to go straight to number three.
JEFF: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: What’s next? Rather than peeling back and asking some other questions to help inform where you go next, if anywhere. So answer those questions, email me, send me your responses. I’m being serious. I would love to see where you net out. Okay?
JEFF: Yeah, that’d be great.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’ll be my little accountability for you.
JEFF: Thank you. Thank you for that. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, thank you. Thank you so much. When Jeff came to the coaching conversation, he was facing a bit of a harsh reality, that he had worked hard in an industry that excited him, had had some success, and recently had been feeling like he was backsliding. While these setbacks can be discouraging, there are also opportunities ripe for learning. The most effective path to leadership is not linear. It’s often a series of zigzags with lessons learned at each inflection point, but only if you take a moment to think it through and do the work, rather than just move on to the next gig. In Jeff’s case, he used this moment in his career to take stock of himself, what he wanted, and what he needed to do to move forward to align his career with his core values, and what’s most important to him, something everyone would benefit from doing from time to time. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and that’s a wrap on season five. We’ll be back with more episodes in the fall. In the meantime, if you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions you hear on this show. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also find me and my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe, and leave a review on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 6
Year: 2023
================================================================================

SPEAKER 1: I have gotten feedback in the past that I sometimes tend to kick up, kiss across. I have a real challenge with leadership who I consider is not up to the task or inept.
SPEAKER 2: Saying that I can run the ship for a few weeks or months, that’s different to saying, “I’ll be the right thing into the future and you can count on me for years to come.”
SPEAKER 3: I think I work best in greenfield environments as opposed to more established, more mature environments, because there’s so much to fix.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m executive coach Muriel Wilkins, and we are back with an all-new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
. On this show, we dive deep into actual coaching sessions with leaders facing real problems that you might just be facing as well. This season we’re tackling everything from deciding if you should move from an interim to a permanent position to wondering if you come off as too demanding or controlling, to figuring out if you’re in a rut and how to get out.
SPEAKERS 4: All these pivots happened because at the time, the thing that I think is the what for is the basis of those decisions. And then I get there and I’m like, “Nope, that wasn’t it.” So now I think I’m completely second-guessing myself because every time I made that decision along the way it has turned out to not be the decision. Gosh forbid I actually use that as a teaching moment of saying, “Well, maybe it’s cumulative and you needed all those experiences to get to where you are,” but my mind doesn’t tackle it that way. It’s like, “Nope, you just messed up again. Nope, you messed up again.” And I think that’s where I’m at now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen in on these real coaching sessions and learn some lessons to apply to your own career.
Coaching Real Leaders
returns with season six this September. Be sure to subscribe now on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts so that you don’t miss an episode.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: The One Skill Leaders Need Today (from Radical Candor)
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Hey folks, it’s me, Muriel. Where I live in the US we are deep in the summer. I’m enjoying mine, and I hope you’re making the most of yours. We’re hard at work on a brand-new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
for you this fall. We’ve got some exciting episodes up our sleeves, and I can’t wait for you to hear them. But in the meantime, I want to share a fun conversation I had on one of my favorite podcasts,
Radical Candor
, a show that gives you the tips and tools you need to succeed at work without losing your humanity. In the episode, I joined hosts Amy Sandler and Kim Scott to offer my advice to listeners who wrote in with questions about the challenges they’re facing as leaders in today’s hybrid work world. We also debate the most important skill leaders need to be successful. Kim and I also share some funny stories about our first business ventures when we were kids. I really enjoyed this conversation, and I think you will too. Here’s more from our friends at
Radical Candor
.
KIM SCOTT: Hello everybody. Welcome to the
Radical Candor Podcast
. I’m Kim Scott, co-founder of Radical Candor and author of
Radical Candor
and
Just Work
. Think “justice,” not “working all the time.”
AMY SANDLER: Good clarification. I am Amy Sandler, your host for the
Radical Candor
Podcast
, and today we’re really excited. We are welcoming Muriel Wilkins to our first radically candid conversation of 2023. So welcome, Muriel. We are so excited to welcome you and have you bring your voice into our podcast. For those of you who don’t know Muriel Wilkins, you are a C-Suite advisor and executive coach with a nearly 20-year track record of helping senior leaders and teams take their effectiveness to the next level. She’s the host of the Harvard Business Review podcast
Coaching Real Leaders
and the co-author of
Own the Room: Discover Your Signature Voice to Master Your Leadership Presence
. Muriel, when did that book, Own the Room come out?
MURIEL WILKINS: 10 years ago, which is hard to believe.
AMY SANDLER: Wow.
KIM SCOTT: Wow.
AMY SANDLER: That is amazing. Well, I’m excited to check that out. I think that’s more important than ever. As we get started, there are a couple of areas of commonality between us. First of all, I will say, and Jason Rosoff is not on our podcast, so just to make it clear that being on this podcast, attendance at Harvard Business School is not a requirement. But it turns out that we were all at Harvard Business School at the same time in the mid-90s. Kim and I did not know each other. We were in the same class and you were, it sounds like a year behind us.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
AMY SANDLER: We also did not know each other.
MURIEL WILKINS: We did not.
KIM SCOTT: But now we do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now we do.
AMY SANDLER: And now we do. And it sounds like your business partner was a classmate as well. Wonderful. The other thing that leapt out at me as a point of commonality between you and Kim, I was reading that you started your first business at age six.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
AMY SANDLER: When you offered to save your family members change in a safe place in exchange for a penny a week.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
AMY SANDLER: Although you were unaware this was called a bank. Is this true?
MURIEL WILKINS: This is very true. I had this little green jewelry box, and it’s funny you said I was unaware it was called a bank. Later on, people questioned me and said, “Are you sure it wasn’t a Ponzi scheme of some type?” There’s a thin line, right? But I was like, I would find change and I would save it in my little thing. And then I started telling people, “Well, if you’ve left change there, let me hold onto it for you.” You can just pay it. Who knows what would’ve happened to that bank these days?
AMY SANDLER: Yeah.
KIM SCOTT: And did you give interest to your family members?
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know what I did exactly.
KIM SCOTT: But you did safety, it was pure safety.
MURIEL WILKINS: I was just like just pure safety. And I think, oh my gosh, okay, I’m going to reveal a lot here. So I think underneath it all, I was just sort of hoping they’d forget that they gave me their change, and that was my plan.
KIM SCOTT: You know what? That’s a good plan. When I was at Google, Google got a billion dollars a year in revenue from people who had tried out AdWords. And as far as we could tell, never checked in again. So I think they forgot that they had set up some $5 a month-
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. I mean-
KIM SCOTT: … experiment.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look-
KIM SCOTT: A billion dollars a year. That bank-
MURIEL WILKINS: The whole subscription model, right? When I think about how much I am contributing to the economic forces of this world we live in by the number of subscriptions that I have forgotten to cancel.
KIM SCOTT: Yes. Yeah.
AMY SANDLER: Maybe we might need to create a little recovery group with that, because I feel like I am the lead person of signing up for subscriptions as well as digital courses that I sort of forgot at the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
AMY SANDLER: Well, Kim, you had a, I don’t know how to characterize it. You had some experiences as a bank teller at an actual bank, if I’m not mistaken.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, well, I was much older than six. My business career also began when I was six, except mine began less in a more, what shall we say, typical way. I had a lemonade stand, like a lot of six year olds. And I got in the paper with my lemonade stand, and then the lemonade stand got stolen. And so, that was an early lesson in the dangers of too much publicity. And my father was really proud of myself that I had made $5 one day, which seemed like a huge amount of money. And my father told me he was going to start charging me for amortization of the refrigerator. And I thought, “Oh my gosh, business is so hard, I can’t do it.”
AMY SANDLER: And that’s why you went to become a writer because you knew how to smell amortization at a young age.
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: She also knew what a hostile takeover felt like.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, exactly. Exactly. All kinds of early lessons. But my experience as a bank teller was not a good one. I don’t add well in my head and my mind tends to wander when faced with a boring task, which surely being a bank teller is a boring task. And I gave away-
AMY SANDLER: And just to be clear, Kim, a boring task for you. Some folks might find some-
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, you’re right. You’re right. I am not detail oriented and I mess up. And my way to protect myself from my screw-ups is to say it’s boring, but it’s probably not boring. It’s probably just that I was screwing up. Anyway, so I gave away a lot of the bank’s money that summer because the errors tended to get caught in one direction but not the other. And my boss at the time kept telling me, “You can do it if you just try.” And now all of a sudden her sort of cheerleading me and encouraging me was very discouraging. Because now not only was it like a math failure, it was a moral failure. I wasn’t trying.
AMY SANDLER: You weren’t trying.
KIM SCOTT: I didn’t care. Yes. And I always try to remember that when I’m coaching someone who’s not doing well in a job, maybe they just really should be doing a different job, which I should have been mean… It would’ve been much kinder for her to tell me, “Kim, why don’t you go mow some lawns or something. That might be a better job for you.”
MURIEL WILKINS: If you had not gone through the experience, maybe you would’ve never been convinced of that until this day.
KIM SCOTT: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Maybe you thought you should have had a career as a bank teller.
AMY SANDLER: A great unanswered.
KIM SCOTT: That’s true. That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: That the road not taken.
KIM SCOTT: That’s right.
MURIEL WILKINS: The road not taken.
KIM SCOTT: That’s right.
AMY SANDLER: Yeah. Well, Muriel, I am so excited to hear your perspective on some tough listener questions that we get. Since I know that on your podcast you really focus on guiding leaders through difficult, difficult situations facing. And I want to hear a little bit more about your approach to your podcast and coaching in general, but since you are today are guest on the
Radical Candor
podcast, what is your definition of radical candor, your relationship with radical candor? We’d love to hear, what does it mean to you?
MURIEL WILKINS: Boy, I feel as though I have experienced both receiving radical candor as well as not receiving radical candor for a long time and not really knowing the difference, just knowing that one felt right and the other didn’t feel right. And so, the way that I sort of think about it for myself as well as my clients, and I have shared a framework with them so many times as they’re looking to figure out a way to provide feedback and have honest conversations with folks that they work with, is really being able to communicate in a way that intersects the ability to drive to results while still respecting and honoring somebody’s humanity. And so, to me, it’s not taking the humanness out of the equation. While at the same time knowing that you have to deliver the message, right? So that’s the way that I think about it and how I relate to it, and the way that Kim has put it into words was a relief for me because for a long time I really couldn’t put my finger on what it felt like and why it felt the way it did. But now I understand that a whole lot better. It doesn’t come as easily as it can. It takes a lot of practice, but I find with practice it becomes a little bit more natural as you go.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, it does. I mean, for me at least, it’s still hard. I still intend to not say the thing 10 times a day probably. But what helps me remember to say it is knowing how it feels when I haven’t heard it. To me, if I am working with someone and they’re not telling me what I’m doing wrong, they’re not giving me any kind of feedback. It feels to me like being a dead man walking, which is complicated since I’m not a man.
AMY SANDLER: And still among us.
KIM SCOTT: And yes, and still alive.
AMY SANDLER: Thankfully.
KIM SCOTT: It’s complicated. I don’t know. How does it feel to you when you’re not getting the feedback?
MURIEL WILKINS: It depends. I think there’s so much nuance in it. What I love about the model is that it’s very simple to understand. And then as you get into it, there are some nuances. And so, how do I feel when I’m not getting it? Sometimes I don’t feel good because I’m ready to receive it, but I got to tell you the times when I’m not ready to receive it, and I just want to stay in denial. And somebody practices radical candor on me, I’m like, “Why are you being radical and why are you being candid?” I don’t want-
KIM SCOTT: I don’t want either one of those things.
MURIEL WILKINS: No. Can you go to one of the other quadrants? Because I can deal with those. So-
AMY SANDLER: I’d love a little ruinous empathy right about now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly.
KIM SCOTT: There’s a song.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s the one I mainly want.
KIM SCOTT: Yes, tell me lies, tell me lies, tell me sweet little lies.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly. So I think for me, it is, even when I work with my clients and use the framework, just helping them understand that don’t use any model just for the sake of using a model, but think about what the impact is going to be on the other person and whether they even have the capacity to receive what it is that you’re trying to give them.
AMY SANDLER: Yeah. I think that’s a great way to tee it up. We’re going to get into a listener question in just a moment. But the last question I feel like I want to make sure I understand before we get into some specific stories. Muriel, we were chatting as we were connecting about how did we all end up as coaches? And it might not have been the path that was intended. So do you want to share how did you become embody executive coaching might not have been what you were intending?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, it definitely wasn’t what I was intending. I mean, my goal when I went to business school was to be a chief marketing officer somewhere, someday. And I think deep in my bones, given the story of starting a bank when I was six. I think deep in my bones, I knew I wanted to start or lead a business at some point. Right? What happened was, I climbed the ranks and I got to that executive level and I was like, “Ooh, this is a little tougher than I thought it would be.” And it wasn’t all the numbers. I could read financial statements, I could put a strategic plan together, but it was all what we call the “soft skills.” And so, I sought out something to help me. I went to training programs and I was like, “No, that’s not quite it.” And then I was like, somebody told me about getting a coach. So I was like, “Okay, let me find a coach.” And I couldn’t find a coach that resonated with me. And what I meant by that is back then there weren’t really that many coaches who had strong business acumen. And so, I wanted somebody who not only understood the leadership development side of things and the psychological side of things and all. I also wanted somebody who could do all of that in the context of me having to deliver some numbers by the end of the year. And having to hire and fire people, do all the leadership-y stuff that I was going to get rated on, and I couldn’t find it. And a mentor of mine who I think was just tired of hearing me complain about this said, “Well, why don’t you do it?” And I was like, “Do what?” And he was like, “Go be an executive coach. You’ve been talking about wanting to start your own business. It seems like you found a market need, isn’t this what businesses are based on?” He’s like, “Go do it.” And I was like, “Okay.” And that was almost 20 years ago and I haven’t looked back since. And so, fast-forward to now, I think I’ve probably always had fundamentally in me something around knowing that challenges never go away, even as a leader. However, we can all get through them with a little bit more ease. And so, that’s what I see as my purpose now with all of the folks that I work with, is it’s not about getting rid of the obstacles, it’s just so that you can lead with a little bit more ease. And if you can lead with a little bit more ease, man, will that have an impact on those that you lead?
KIM SCOTT: So well said. So well said. Your people are lucky that your mentoring gave you excellent advice, it sounds like.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I took it a little personally. I just thought he didn’t want to hire me for his VC firm. But yeah, he did say, “If it doesn’t work out, come back and I’ll hire you.” And I was like, “Okay, good.” Never went back.
AMY SANDLER: I love looking back and I think as listeners listen, knowing that often the thing that we want to have is often the thing that we’re meant to do and to create. So I think from when you look back on it 20 years later, you can see how you got here. But Kim, I know you and I have had some of those conversations, we wouldn’t have known the future, but looking back on it makes sense to follow some of those dots and invitations. So with that, I want the two of you to discuss a question from one of our listeners. This was about what a boss can do when an employee is too friendly at work. So this person writes, “How do you handle an employee who’s good at their job, delivers, is detailed, thorough, reliable, responsible, has good ideas, loves the job, the people, et cetera, but is also often emotionally driven, can be impulsive, nervous, sometimes overbearing, micromanages, creating conflicts, gets too familiar with others too soon, and sees the workplace as a family? For example, doling out hugs and kisses and gifts that can be perceived as extra.” I’m still quoting here. “I’m in conflict between skills and performance versus behavioral issues. If these are innate qualities that can’t really be changed.” And so, the question is, “Are these behaviors a core part of a personality that can’t be changed?” That was the question from the listener. And the question that I want, Kim, you and Muriel to talk about is how friendly is too friendly at work? Muriel, you’re covering up a smile there.
KIM SCOTT: You want me to go first or you want to go first, Muriel?
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean your choice. It’s your show.
KIM SCOTT: I think you have, it looked like you have some thought.
AMY SANDLER: I feel likes there’s something to say. There’s something-
KIM SCOTT: You have some thoughts-
MURIEL WILKINS: I have so many thoughts. I have so many thoughts.
KIM SCOTT: Okay, let’s hear your thoughts. Okay. Let’s hear it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have so many thoughts and I have so many questions.
KIM SCOTT: Lay them on us.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is the hard part around just getting the email with the question and then you can’t ask the questions that might-
AMY SANDLER: So what’s the first question you would ask if this person was on your show?
MURIEL WILKINS: The first question I would probably ask is, what is your definition of friendly? People have often thought that I’m unfriendly and I think I’m friendly. So there is a relative subjective term to it. She did share some of the things like doling out hugs and gifts, and so there’s something around the actions and the behaviors. What I also don’t have is the context. This is all within a context. I don’t know culturally what the context in which this is happening. Clearly it is triggering something in this individual, but I don’t know if the holistic company culture, even geographic culture. I know when, you all do international work. Sometimes when I talk about certain things here in the US it’s like, “No, you can’t do this, you can’t do that.” But then I deal with folks who are coming from a different geographic region in the world and it’s like, “Well, of course this would be fine.” We always do that. So there is that part to it. That said, over and beyond the question, I would also have a very strong caveat, which is the facial expressions that you’re probably seeing from me as we’re talking, which is, as I coach somebody on an area like this, I have to caveat it very strongly that I don’t have any HR policy background, right? It sounds like this is veering on potentially an HR issue, and I’m not an HR advisor, so I would definitely say you have to check to see where does this fit into the code of conduct around what your company upholds. I think she has some really deep assumptions even in the way that she frames the question around, is this just personality behavior or is it performance? And so, one of the other questions I would have is, what is the difference between the two? Because your performance is driven by your behavior and your performance impacts your behavior. And so, it is very hard to differentiate and discern, particularly if this person is a leader who impact… Unless they are working, which it doesn’t sound like they are in a room by themselves where they don’t impact anybody. We have to understand that behavior is part of our responsibility in terms of how we perform. And so, one of the questions I would definitely ask her is, what’s the difference between performance and behavior and why are we creating a distance between the two? Is it time possibly for you to redefine what it means to be a high performer in this role? So let’s take it away from the individual, think about it in terms of what does it mean to be a high performer in this role? And then look at that vis-a-vis this individual to determine what the next steps are.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, I think that is excellent advice. You know what? The thing that really, the word in this that really jumped out at me for some reason is extra. My daughter said to me, yeah, I was striving and talking to her and I was in a mood. I thought a good mood, but maybe she… And she just looked at me, the way only a 14-year old could do, and she said, “Mom, you are extra tonight.”
AMY SANDLER: Oh, yeah. Oh yeah, we say so team extra.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. Yeah. I just didn’t know this. Somehow, anyway, I like this term extra. Anyway, so here’s what I think about hugs and kisses. So in just work, I thought a lot about hugs and kisses, as you can imagine. And my father helped me write that book. He read many, many, and he has a very different head. He passed away unfortunately a couple of years ago, but he was an older southern white man. So he had a different perspective often on the world than… And I was sort of, I don’t love getting hugged. I don’t love… And I find, one time I was on a board meeting and one person kissed me and then everybody wanted to kiss me, and I knew that one person really well and I didn’t want to kiss everybody on the board. And I was like, especially there’s some gender aspects to the hugging and kissing as well. And my father said, “I think it would be a sad and cold world without hugs.” Which is funny because my father was not a hugger. And so, I think that’s true. Some people really do want to hug and other people don’t. And so, the thing that I would say to this person, not to the person asking the question, but to the employee is that if you want to show you care, part of showing you care is understanding what other people’s boundaries are. And if a person doesn’t want to be hugged, it is not an act of caring to hug them and sort of talk… I would talk to them about that. And gifts. Not everybody is comfortable getting gifts. Sometimes it could feel almost like a bribe to someone or something. I’m sure that that’s not this person’s intention, but I would sort of explain these things to them. And then I would agree to advising the person who wrote in, that the way you behave is going to impact your performance and the way that you work with the people around you is going to impact your performance. So I don’t say these are innate, I believe there are very few innate qualities.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, I wouldn’t be in the line of work that I am in if I thought that there were things that could not be… I don’t even think about it in terms of change, to be honest. I never really think about changing my clients, even though they come in scared that’s what I’m going to do. And I’m like, I don’t have that type of power, trust me. I don’t think about change, I think about range. Which is, you have a number of different ways that you can behave and know that you have options in default. I think in this case, it’s also tricky just because of the time that we’re in, right? We’re talking a lot about psychological safety and making sure people feel safe at work. I think there’s a power dynamic. I don’t know this individual where I think they said it was a he, I’m not sure. But where this individual would lie in terms of perceived power dynamic within the organization. And so, taking that into context. So it really gets tricky. If this was one of my clients who came to me, and this is the feedback that they had received that, “Look you’re seeing it’s too friendly. You give out kisses and hugs and gifts.” I’d say, “Okay, let’s kind of talk about what’s going on in the bigger scheme of things, and let’s not even make this about you, right?” Let’s talk about the impact that this might have and whether that’s the impact that you want to have. And if it’s, great, I can sleep at night. If it’s not, then let’s figure out another way that you can show connection that’s not through kisses and hugs and gifts. And again, I would probably be a little nervous around, is there some overstepping of some lines that could put this person’s career at risk, quite frankly.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. And I think the point that you made about power is so important. Deb Gruenfeld, who’s at GSB at Stanford, has… You know how every once in a while you read something and it’s like, “Oh, this explains everything.” She has this great article about how power impacts people’s behavior. And if a person has power, and it may be positional power or it may just be that they’re sort of overrepresented, shall we say, that’s its own sort of power. That they’re much more likely to approach others to get too close, to hug and not to pick up on the signals that people are sending. In fact, they explain, Kissinger famously said, “Power’s the greatest aphrodisiac.” But it turns out it’s just that the powerful people think they’re sexier, but they may not be. They probably are not, in fact. Yeah. And so they’re much more likely to approach in ways that are not welcome.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I wonder also, I don’t have any data to back this up, but I also wonder with power and privilege to a certain extent, do you sort of buy into your own story, right?
KIM SCOTT:
Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is, well, it’s okay for me. I love getting kisses and hugs and gifts, therefore-
KIM SCOTT: Everybody does.
MURIEL WILKINS: … everybody should. And it’s like, I’m just being me, you know? Take it or leave it. And so, I’ve seen this. I had a client once where he got sort of the, you’re too comfortable feedback. And he was a senior level guy, C-suite level guy. And the way that it came about, what he was doing is he jokes a lot. So they would be in meetings and he would joke about somebody. He’d be like, “Oh my gosh, what did you not take a shower last night? You look the shovel.” But he was joking. For him, it was a way of level setting. Well to the person, two levels down. They were like, “Oh my God, he just said this in front of everybody. Maybe he doesn’t like me.” So it has a different affect and a different weight to it. But he wasn’t even thinking about it that way. He was just like, that’s just me getting along with everyone. And I’m like, “Well, you’re not.”
KIM SCOTT: Yeah, yeah, exactly. And I think it’s so interesting that kind of joking around. Like my son, who’s all… I have twins. My son is 14.
MURIEL WILKINS: So do I?
KIM SCOTT: Oh, I read that… How old… Well, I shouldn’t ask how-
MURIEL WILKINS: 16. 16, I don’t care.
KIM SCOTT: Okay. So we’re in the same-
MURIEL WILKINS: I talk about my family.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. Okay. So my son plays baseball. And when he gets back from… And that team, the culture on that team is they show each other affection by giving each other a shirt. And that’s fine if that’s how they want to. But then he comes back from a game and he’s like, “Give me…” And I don’t like to be talked, I don’t like the… And I have to say to him, “It’s fine if that’s how you want to interact with your teammates, but I feel like I’m getting bullied here.” And he gets it. But the first time he is like, “But that’s how I talk to my friends.” I’m like, “Well, I’m not on your baseball team.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Right. Right.
KIM SCOTT: And even if I were, I would say to the guys on the team, “You can’t talk to me that way. I don’t like that.”
AMY SANDLER: I think it’s such an interesting line around Muriel, what you said of just, I’m just being me. And that fine line between what we would encourage of being your authentic self and bringing sort of the part that makes you human, and how do we discern? So one way we discern is the impact on the other person. Are there any other ways by which we balance just being me, my authentic self with being part of a team and a high performing team?
MURIEL WILKINS: There are so many layers on this, right? I mean, if you really want to go deep, I think when people say, I am just being me, they don’t even really know what me is. So they’re not even being me. They’re just being their learned version of me. And the way that they are trying to connect, whether it’s through the jokes or through the gifts or through the this, is actually a persona, their representative. So they haven’t even typically done the deep work. Because if they had, they wouldn’t feel compelled to have to act this way. They would be okay with saying, “In this situation, I’m okay not doing that. If it’s going to front you, I have plenty of other places where I can express myself in this way. But for the good of the team because I’m either part of the team or I’m leading the team. And because I care about the connection, I’m not going to impact you in that way.” So that’s one. I think secondly, if somebody isn’t, particularly if somebody is in a leadership role, it’s very hard to separate me from the culture of the organization because the leaders set the culture. Right? They are a steward to the culture. So if who you believe you are and who you feel you need to be does not reflect the values of the culture of the organization. Something’s going to suffer. Either the people who are being impacted or you. So you have to find that intersection. I think this is really what it means when we say somebody’s a culture carrier. It’s just a fancy way of saying it, but it’s look, “Here are our norms and are you good with them?” Can you embody them in a way where you being a representative of this organization also doesn’t go against who you are. So I think that that’s really another piece of it. And authenticity is only one side of it. It’s to me, it’s being authentic within the context that you’re in. And there was a skit, it’s a little controversial to state this comedian’s name these days, but his initials are dc. But there was a skit he did way back when, and it was hilarious. It was when keeping it real goes bad.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I see this all the time. It’s like, you can authenticate yourself right out of a job. You want to be authentic, but authentic is not also this armor, right? Yeah. Like let me do me. No, you work in an organization and you have a choice to work in this organization. And if you are not aligned with it or there is so much dissonance, because you’re never going to have a hundred percent alignment. But if there’s so much dissonance, you ought to think about whether that’s the right place for you. I know I have faced that in my career, and I’ve had either made the choice to stay or go based on that, but it is something that I think people need to be really realistic about.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. I think that is so, such good advice and so important. I also think that it can be helpful to talk to people about maybe abstract up a level on authenticity. So for example, I cuss a lot. But there are certain audiences where I’m just not going to drop an F-bomb. Because the F-bomb is not the authentic Kim Scott. The authentic Kim Scott is a person who shares her emotion and connects with people. And if dropping the F-bomb is going to prevent me from connecting with someone, then I’m happy not to do it. That’s not inauthentic. What’s authentic is connecting with others in a way that is real for yourself, but also doesn’t hurt the other person. If the way you’re connecting hurts the other person, then it’s just bullying. That’s right. And hopefully that’s not your authentic self.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. And I think sometimes we use this term authenticity as people who are authentic as this veiled definition of being confident, right?
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t see it that way. I actually think your ability to be so comfortable in your skin, which is another way that people feel authenticity. The ability to be so comfortable with who you are, that you are able to then move from you, who you are every now and then. Knowing that home base is not going anywhere is actually what it means to have confident authenticity. Right? But if you are so attached to who you are that you can never let it go, you can never flex, you can never have range. That’s not authenticity. That’s just you trying to figure, you trying not to lose yourself. Because not to get deeply philosophical, but because you really haven’t found yourself. Right. So there’s this whole-
AMY SANDLER: Muriel, when you say about range because you mentioned that range versus change. Can you kind of double click on that for us, what that looks like? Maybe an example too, of the difference between range and change.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. So let me use one that comes up a lot. You have the folks who are given feedback that they don’t speak up enough in a meeting. And so changes all of a sudden all they do is speak up and now they don’t listen anymore. All they do is speak up, they go away to the other side. Range is you can do both. So we look at it from a notion even of, one of my kids, both my kids play tennis, one of them has played longer. But you can’t get through a tennis game just by, or a good tennis match and be a really great player by just knowing how to do a forehand. You’ve got to be able to do the forehand and the backhand. You can’t say, “Oh, my backhand sucks so now all I’m going to do is my backhand and practice it, practice it, practice it. And all of a sudden now I’m a backhand player.” No, you have to have range. You have to be able to… You might have strengths in one, but you have to be able to use both well enough. Right? So that’s what I mean by range, that there are a number of different avenues so that you have choice. Because with choice, that’s where your real power comes in. An agency comes in where for any given situation, you can decide what is going to best serve this situation right now? What is going to put me closer to the outcome that we’re looking to achieve? Is it for me to listen or is it for me to speak up? But I’m not going to default to one just because I can’t do the other. I’m going to be able to decide which one to use because I know how to do both well enough to get us closer to the end goal.
AMY SANDLER: Great. It sounds very aligned with radical candor that we can care personally and challenge directly.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
AMY SANDLER: We love an and here. I am really curious, given all of the different coaching sessions you’re leading both with your company as well as on your podcast. What would you say are maybe the one or two top challenges folks are dealing with right now, that leaders are dealing with right now as the world of work evolves? 2023, coming out of the pandemic hybrid, all of these issues around psychological safety. What would you say sort of one or two top issues that seem to keep popping up, that might not have popped up a few years ago?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure. I mean, there’s always sort of the regular classic management challenges. Right? How do I keep people motivated? How do I lead change? None of that has gone away. It’s still here. It just looks a little bit different. I think what is coming up a lot, and interestingly, it’s not necessarily what my clients are coming to coaching for. All right. They come with like, “I want to be more strategic.” And I’m like, “Okay.” And then we get into it and lo and behold. So I think one of the big challenges is what folks are expecting from their leaders today is very different than what they were expecting 10, 15, 20 years ago. And yet the leaders, and I’m talking about the senior leaders that I work with, they were in their team members or staff’s shoes 10, 15, 20 years ago. So there is this notion what we were talking about before, well, if that’s what I expected, this is what they should be expecting from me. And so therefore their behaviors. And so how has it changed? I think there is a level of empathy that individuals teams are expecting from their leaders that was not expected in the past. And it has been, I think the pandemic and folks working from home, and then the number of different sort of crises that happened during that time, sort of increased the need for empathy. And at that time, leaders were willing to give it, right? Because they were like, “We’ve got to motivate, and people are around me so I have to be able to be empathetic.” And now as leaders are trying to go back to what normal was, whatever that means, they’re letting go of that a little bit but they don’t realize that their teams have not let go of it. And it is now, to me, what I’m seeing is it is a rules of engagement expectation. And so there’s a dissonance there and there’s a tension. And then I think in terms of just where we are economically, leaders are just, they just want to drive to results. And they’re sort of saying, “Well, it’s either drive the results or be empathetic. I can’t do both.”
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. And you have to do both.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you have to. You have to. They’re not seeing it as part of the equation. You’re not going to get your people to do more if you don’t come with that gene. So, this notion of like, how do you treat people as humans is huge right now. And I see it from anywhere from the way layoffs are happening to even just singular decisions that some of my clients have to make. Right? Do I not approve that receipt, that expense receipt that they turned in? And I’m like, “Okay, so what’s the human thing to do right now?” So that is a big one, and that is very behavioral. You can’t tell somebody all of a sudden be empathetic. It takes some inner work to do it in an authentic way and not feel like you’re putting things at risk. I think the other piece, macro level that that’s a challenge that I’m seeing is all this work, and I’m not a DEI expert. I just have DEI lived experience. But with my leaders, I definitely see the impact of, what does equity mean within an organization. And what I see is a lot of them fail to see the connection between the work that they’re trying to do in their organization around equity and power. Right?
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: They don’t see the connect and they are the people in power. And I’m like, okay. So you realize by saying that strategically you are committed to DEI in your organization, you are in fact questioning the very structure and construct that your whole career is based on. Do you understand that? And that’s a big sort of identity work that they have to do. So again, this never comes up. I have yet to have a client, I have had maybe one who came to coaching and said, “I just told my whole organization that I stand behind equity and I have no idea what that means. We need to do this and we need to do it behind closed doors because I don’t know what it means.” But most of them don’t… It doesn’t even cross their mind until something happens. And they’re like, “I said the wrong thing. I got these emails because I said this at a town hall and I have no idea what I said wrong.” Right? And so doing that work around what does it mean to be a person of power in this day and age. It’s not seen as great from the people who need to be led as it was in the past, is a real question of identity where I’m finding a lot of my leaders are just tired and fatigued and feeling like they can’t do anything right.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. And I think that’s such an important point. I wonder, I was thinking about this. I wonder, here’s my question that I was asking myself, maybe you have an answer. It seems to me that increasingly today, people in positions of power don’t feel safe. In a way that 20 or 30 years ago, they did feel safe. And overall, I think that’s a good thing actually. But they’re not always responding well to that. It’s in a way, there’s more checks and balances on power. I think there’s a wonderful book called The End of Power about how power degrades more quickly in this environment. And so, you can’t afford to rely on command and control. You actually have to build relationships and show empathy/compassion for people if you want to remain in a position of authority. For example, I was recently talking to a group of CEOs and someone said, “I’m not going to give feedback to underrepresented people on my team because then I’ll be in trouble with HR.” And it was very hard for me to respond. I wonder how I should have responded. Because my instinct, what I thought was, “HR reports to you, what’s wrong with you? Man up.” Which was not. I did not say that even in the moment, but I was mad. I was sort of mad about-
AMY SANDLER: Kim, would you have in your mind if it was a woman who said that have said, “Woman up?”
KIM SCOTT: I would’ve said, man up again. Even worse. Even worse. I know. Bias on top of bias on top of bias, unfair to everybody. Unfair to men, unfair to women, unfair to non-binary people. But I get it. So on the one hand, I found the question irritating. On the other hand, I understand the question. If somebody says the wrong thing, they can wind up in a lawsuit. And so, I want to respond with empathy to these people, but at the same time I want to challenge them directly. I don’t want to respond with ruinous empathy. I want to respond with… So what’s the right, what would you have said to that CEO?
MURIEL WILKINS: And I know my clients hate me for this. Well, they don’t hate me. Because they have hired back.
KIM SCOTT: They love you. They hire you.
MURIEL WILKINS: But in a way, I’m like, “Is this uncomfortable for you?” And they’re like, “Yeah.” I’m like, “Good.”
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because that means I don’t know what the answer is.
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s what, I’m like, I don’t know what the answer is, but the fact that it feels uncomfortable means that there’s an answer up ahead at some point. But you’re processing.
KIM SCOTT: And that you’re growing.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that you’re growing. And that there’s some tension. And guess what? That’s what leadership is all about is holding the tension. And this is a tension that you haven’t held yet. And this is one that we actually don’t, we haven’t quite figured out. Nobody has figured it out. That’s why even the whole like, how do we get people back out of being on Zoom and back into physical space. Nobody knew, everybody wants an answer because that’s what makes us feel safe. But is it really safe? Not really. There’s just going to be something else that’s coming up. Now AI’s making people feel unsafe. There’s always something that makes… So I think we need to get rid… I think we have to yes, create a culture where people feel like they can bring their selves to work. And that’s the way I think about psychological safety. I think as leaders, just like I don’t like to use too much of family metaphors. But as a parent, it is not my responsibility… My kids are not responsible to make me feel safe. They’re just not.
They’re not responsible to make me feel good about myself. They’re not responsible to make me happy. They’re not responsible to, I have a responsibility to them up to a certain point. And so, I’m not saying that it’s a parental relationship, but as a leader you do have to be a steward to the people that you lead.
AMY SANDLER: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, my question back to that leader would be, okay, so let’s imagine for a bit that you were going to hypothetically give this person who comes from an underrepresented group, some feedback. Let’s hypothetically play that out. What might that sound like in a way where you feel like you have delivered the message and they can hear it in a way that they don’t feel offended or whatever you want to use as an adjective. I guarantee you the part of the formula that this person doesn’t know, that he didn’t know is, “Well, I don’t know what makes him feel offended?” Well, bingo. Let’s do the homework then.
KIM SCOTT: Let’s find out.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Let’s find out.
KIM SCOTT: Yeah. And I think part of it, I’ve been thinking about safety and freedom. I think we need to… It’s never going to feel comfortable to make a mistake, but we need to know that sometimes we will say the wrong thing. But if we are operating in a culture where someone will tell us if we say the wrong thing, and then we do the right thing and fix it and apologize. Because we’re all bound to mess up from time to time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, this happened to a client of mine where it’s somebody who is not from an underrepresented group and they said something in a town hall, and then they got a barrage of emails and they were like, “I didn’t even know I’m not supposed to say that.” And I said, “Yeah, I didn’t know either. Who knew? That’s interesting. Wow.”
KIM SCOTT: Now we know.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, now I know. And she felt like, “I can never say the right thing.” I said, you’re focusing too much on being able to say the right thing. The whole point of this is more about how you respond to when you don’t get things right.
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you are going to stay in this false sense of, I’m so superior and I’m so powerful and I’m so this, that I can never do anything wrong. There goes the whole equity agenda out the window.
KIM SCOTT: Yes. Totally.
MURIEL WILKINS: The whole point is to level set, right?
KIM SCOTT: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think what’s happened, right, is for years equity was around bringing the underrepresented groups up in “to our level.” And I think what’s happening now that’s uncomfortable it’s like, “No, no, no, no. You, the people who are in power need to meet everyone else where they are versus everyone else meeting you where you are. And that’s a real just shift in thinking in perspective. So there’s a lot more to unpack than should I say something or should I not?
KIM SCOTT: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Particularly in this type of context and where we are now.
AMY SANDLER: I love that framing. And Muriel, just to amplify what you said, that this is a tension we haven’t held yet. At Radical Candor, we’re all about the tension of caring personally and challenging directly, and just kind of giving people permission to mess up but still keep trying to hold that tension. One of the things that we like to do at the close of our podcast is to offer some tips. And the other thing that you were mentioning was around being more human at work, which is something we talk about all the time. For someone who is struggling with their empathy muscle, with developing more care personally, what’s one tip that you like to give your clients how they can start to move up on care personally or build more empathy?
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen with curiosity. It’s really not that hard. Like stop talking and listen and ask questions that are about the other person. Right? I say, what is the… Not that I’ve been on a date for a very, very long time. But in my imaginary mind, I still remember show interest in the other person. Right? And how do you do that? By listening and asking questions, right? So, I think listening is the biggest and the most underused skill that helps drive empathy, and a lot of other things as well.
KIM SCOTT: So well said.
AMY SANDLER: I couldn’t agree more. Yeah. So well said. Well, we’re going to wrap up. Kim, any final words or okay to move us on?
KIM SCOTT: Muriel, thank you. Loved the conversation, learned so much about how to coach properly from you. So, thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you. This was really great. Thank you. I hope you enjoyed that conversation. It was such a pleasure being a guest on
Radical Candor
with Amy and Kim. If you like this episode and you want more of their content, check out their website, radicalcandor.com. Or you can subscribe to the Radical Candor Podcast wherever you get your podcast. And stay tuned for another special treat in the feed later this summer, before our new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
this fall. Until then, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Be well.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 5
Year: 2023
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am leadership coach Muriel Wilkins, and we’re back with an all-new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Many people want and need to sharpen their leadership skills, and turn to executive coaching when they have nowhere else to go. On this show, we peel back the curtain on these coaching sessions to share the leadership lessons that my guest clients gain – and how they can apply to you, too. This season, our coaching conversations will dive deep into questions like, how do I keep my team and myself motivated after layoffs, especially when resources are tight?
SPEAKER 2: I want to make sure my team is good. I want to make sure the clients and customers are good. Going through a situation like this, I carry my own personal feelings and my personal challenges, but also a strong responsibility for the community. I’m also acknowledging that there’s so much that is out of my control.
MURIEL WILKINS: How do I rebound when it feels like I’ve hit a wall in my career?
SPEAKER 3: So, slowly my team began to be reduced. My scope was sort of divvied up, and then at the start of this year, they took the rest of my team away and then I was converted back to, like, an individual contributor. And that was the point where I felt like the last straw for me had kind of broke.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how do I make sure my team and I are moving fast enough to reach our goals?
SPEAKER 4: There are lots of things that I already wish we had accomplished, but I know that it takes time and I know that it’s okay to invest the time. I mean, if that’s okay, that’s a good use of time to try to work toward accomplishing these strategic directions. But I am just a little impatient and I wish in many cases that we are already there.
MURIEL WILKINS:
Coaching Real Leaders
returns with season five this April. Be sure to subscribe now wherever you get your podcasts. And if you’d like to discuss the
Coaching Real Leaders
episodes, join me at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com.

