
================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Balance My Career Ambitions as Part of a Dual-Career Couple?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting, focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Ali to protect her confidentiality. She’s far along in her career and has a good sense of her own leadership style and strengths, as well as her long-term goals.
ALI: I would say I’m really at a pivot point in my career. I’ve been really at a point of wanting to accelerate my scope of responsibility. I do lead a large team currently. Still, I know that there’s more that I’m capable of and more that I want to do and continue to grow to really a C-level executive space.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ali landed in her current position as a result of trying to balance a dual-career household and due to organizational circumstances beyond her control. Her spouse was recently offered a role that they didn’t think he should turn down, but it also meant deprioritizing ALI’s trajectory.
ALI: It’s truly an amazing opportunity and probably a job that would only come around once or twice within his career. We’ve been able to balance our family careers pretty well, and this was, I would say, unplanned. So, I think we were discussing that it was my turn to go after another scope of responsibility, and unfortunately, it really feels like a pause on my career progression. The added complexity is, my current company is going through a massive restructure, so the majority of leadership roles that I was identifying as my next step no longer exists in my company. I’ve been placed in a role that’s pretty similar to roles that I’ve done in the past, so the sense of challenge, business complexity, and just general leadership growth seems relatively low at the moment. So, what I’m looking for coaching on is, how do I continue to feel like I’m growing while I’m staying put?
MURIEL WILKINS: On multiple fronts, Ali feels like she’s stagnant, but she wants to figure out ways to continue to grow. Before we focus on where she is on her path now, I wanted to get a sense of her ultimate goals. Let’s begin there. You said that your aspirations are ultimately to be at the C-suite level. Is that right?
ALI: That’s correct. I aim to be a chief operating officer. I am a generalist, but very passionate about the interconnection cross-functionally and how to support execution of strategy.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. What have you done throughout your career to kind of lead you to that decision? What drove your aspiration to get there?
ALI: I’ve had a very diverse career past multiple industries, so I’ve been able to have the experience and exposure that showcases the strengths that I have. A couple of the strengths that I know I exhibit professionally is cross-functional connection. So, I’m very good at using different language to understand different functions and being able to translate that to a common goal and then motivate people to go after that common goal. And that’s something that I fundamentally feel like that ultimate COO role has as its core, and it’s something that I continue to do in all of the roles that I’ve had probably over the last decade in particular.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. Do you feel like your career progression, without the possible constraints of the company restructuring as well as what’s happening with your partner, which we’ll get to, without those two things, do you think your career would’ve continued to progress in that direction?
ALI: Definitely.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
ALI: And I know that that is the case because I was actively applying for other roles outside of this company. Just knowing the reduction in force was looming and was validated, I was able to get job offers that were right in line with where I was wanting to go, and also validated that I do have the strengths and the potential to continue to grow in scope.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So, let me just make sure I get the right lay of the land. So far, both you and your husband have careers that you’re both interested in pursuing, right?
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve been able to toggle where one pushes while the other sort of creates the stability. For a while, that’s worked. The discussion between the two of you is recently like, “Okay, now, Ali, it’s your turn to push.” Right?
ALI: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then he now is in a position where he’s taking on something new, chance of a lifetime, and so he has to push, right?
ALI: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so there’s that. There’s the restructuring going on, meaning not as many opportunities as before. So that’s sort of created a block for you.
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: For a certain amount of time. But you are getting validation on the outside that your attributes, your skills, your experience are highly valued, and if the opportunity became available, whether it’s internal at your company or otherwise, you could certainly fill that spot.
ALI: I think so, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So, I’m curious how the decision was made between you and your husband around him having now to push and you not pushing. What is it that’s causing that both of you can’t push at the same time?
ALI: It’s a really good question, because up until this point, I think we have been able to balance it really effectively, where we’ve even taken opportunities to where we’ve had to live in different continents for a period of time, and that was intentional and we knew how to balance that. What’s different now is I think the family dynamic. So, I do have children, they’re at different stages in their development. And because my husband’s role will require a substantial percentage of his time and really have a broader impact onto our family than maybe some of the other roles that he’s had in the past or that I have had, it requires some additional stability that my job offers. So, both financially as well as the time that my role requires. Because I’ve already been working at this company for a while, I feel like I can leverage relationships pretty effectively to balance and provide the flexibility that my family may need during this time. So, that’s different, is that in the past I think we have both been able to balance and accelerate our careers, but this opportunity for my partner just requires a substantial amount of his time and so I need to take up a bit more on the personal side.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. If I may, how are you feeling about that decision?
ALI: I’m obviously excited for him. I think this is such a perfect opportunity for him. I think for me, it feels disappointing and that I’m stagnating in my career. I was actively eager to continue to grow in both scope and responsibility of my role as well as the team size that I managed, and I felt like I was on a very good trajectory to get that extended scope. Now I feel pretty stagnant, and I think that that’s why I’m having this conversation. I want to continue to grow. If I know that that constraint of staying in the city that I’m in, staying in the company that I’m in is a real constraint for a couple of years, I want to figure out how I can continue to grow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if your company had not been going through this restructuring, where the opportunities are now more limited, what decision would you have made? Would it have made any difference in terms of your decision?
ALI: I don’t think so. It wouldn’t have changed my interest in applying and seeing if I could get validation for my strengths and skills. It also wouldn’t have changed the decision to prioritize my family and my partner’s opportunity. I think that those both would have still occurred.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, you would’ve prioritized your partner’s opportunity, you’d have gotten validation that you could move up. And if there had been opportunities within your company to move up, what would you have decided?
ALI: I probably would’ve gone after it. The reason being is because I do feel like I’m at a really pivotal point in my career to really advocate for that next level and to take on more than what I know it could do, but really stretch myself to try to get a leadership opportunity that is making me uncomfortable so that I can continue to grow and that I can continue to showcase I can manage more complex scope of responsibility.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if I’m hearing you correctly, if the opportunity availed itself at your current company to stretch and something that was aligned with what your aspirations are, kind of get you closer to that C-suite level, you would’ve taken it in spite of your husband’s new opportunity?
ALI: I think so. I think the nuance around taking that, I think it feels like it could have been a yes, and. It could have been both of us where he still could have taken his opportunity, and I, because I’m so familiar with the company that I’m currently working in, would’ve felt confident that I could take on that added responsibility for myself and still be able to manage both, both the personal commitments and stepping up there and the professional growth and commitments, as opposed to starting at a totally new company where I don’t feel as I have that foundation of relationships and understanding how the company operates.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. So, it’s the familiarity that would’ve given you an added bonus.
ALI: I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: That would’ve enabled you to really not have to choose between your husband’s career and yours?
ALI: I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: The challenge that Ali is bringing to the table is really one about prioritization, trade-offs, and optimizing her situation. She’s in a bit of a tough place because she’s facing both family pressures and organizational changes that have kept her in a role that doesn’t feel like much of a stretch. She’s also had the opportunity to look externally for roles and knows that there’s potential there. So, what’s helpful to realize, even this early in the conversation, is that Ali is coming from a place of strength because she’s decided her priorities and made some choices. But just because you’ve accepted some trade-offs at a particular stage in your career, doesn’t mean you have to sacrifice everything or that you’ll remain stagnant forever. You might’ve noticed, I’ve already started with some what-if kinds of questions and scenarios to get her thinking differently about her situation. I’ll stay with this sort of inquiry with Ali to open up new paths she might be able to take. What would make an external opportunity, so outside of your current company, what would make an external opportunity feel like a yes, and?
ALI: A larger scope of work, more aligned to a generalist, my personal interest, value-aligned company, a place that I could still manage the personal commitments that I have. I guess those would be some of the dimensions.
MURIEL WILKINS: How would you know if you could get all of those things?
ALI: That’s a really good question. I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean I don’t know either, but I’m just curious. Is it something that you’ve even considered?
ALI: I think it is in that … Yeah, this is a really good question. Because some of the external opportunities that I’ve gone after in reality don’t support being able to balance both my partner’s career and my own.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because?
ALI: Because it’s either a new location, a geographic location, it’s a role that I think would require more of my time and investment, especially if it’s a new company. So, I think that the opportunities that I’ve gone after inherently do require a trade-off between personal and professional.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, all I’m trying to see is what your options are. And it sounds like option number one is, if there was an opportunity internally that would stretch you and lead you in the direction of that C-suite level that you’re aspiring to, that would be a viable option for you. That would be kind of ideal. Option number two is finding something similar, but outside of your company, since your company isn’t offering that right now. So, not waiting till those open up again and trying to find those now, but the uncertainty is, would you have the level of familiarity that would make that onboarding a little bit more efficient and save you some time?
ALI: Yes, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you’re saying is, with option number two, the ones that you’ve looked at, don’t seem like it would give you the flexibility and it seems like they would take a lot more time to onboard.
ALI: Yes, and the reason is, it’s a different geographic scope than where I currently live or work and it’s different industry. So, it is I think a higher learning curve, but that’s also the appeal, is wanting to be able to be in an experience where I’m testing all of the leadership competencies and strengths I think I have within a different environment, both industry and location.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you think about coming up the learning curve … I get the geographic location. So clearly, that’s a non-negotiable. You can’t move.
ALI: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if we were to then restrict it to external opportunities within agreeable geographic location, what I’m hearing you say is, the block would be what would be required to come up the learning curve and at the same time, that’s what’s interesting to you, that kind of is what’s getting you jazzed. So, I kind of go back to the term that you introduced in this, is how could you make that a yes, and. Again, I’m not saying that’s the direction you’re going to go in, I just want to make sure we play it out before you rule it out. How could you make an opportunity where there is a learning curve, more of a learning curve than there would be internally, but it’s interesting to you, how could you make it work for you? What conditions would need to be in place to make it work for you?
ALI: I think that conditions obviously work within the constraints on the personal side. So, same location. And maybe taking an opportunity that 50% of the responsibility is similar, to have that confidence that I know I could come in from day one and feel like I’m adding value and still have 50% of the opportunity stretch me in new ways. That feels manageable, and it feels like I would maybe not compromise on what I’m looking for, but narrow the scope a bit so that it’s not solving all 10 things that I want to experience next in my professional journey, but maybe five.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. So, that is an option. Right? It might not be visible. I mean you might not have seen those opportunities yet, but at the very least, it gives you a sense if you can, on your own, sort of narrow down, of the list of 10, what would be the five that would jazz me up? You can then start looking for opportunities that have those rather than the ones that have all 10.
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: As you said, it might not be bringing you a hundred percent closer to your goal, but it’s bringing you 50% closer, which is better than 0%.
ALI: It’s a lot better than 0%. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: 0% is okay too, but what you said is you want to continue to grow, so.
ALI: Exactly. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re going for 50%.
ALI: Yes. And I think that that’s something that I have realized through this process, is just how much I want this. I want to continue to grow. I have ambition to truly get to that ultimate career level, role, responsibility. And I haven’t felt that way in a while. So, to have those feelings now and then to feel like I’m stagnant is where I’m struggling. And I think that this is helping because yeah, maybe I do need to think of how do I get part of it and not all of it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, coming out of stagnation only takes one step. The minute you move a little bit, you’re out of stagnation. So, what we’re looking at is, okay, it might not be zero to 100, but between zero and 100, there’s 99 other options. So, figuring out what those are, both externally and we’ll also pivot to internally. So internally, under the circumstances of understanding there is restructuring happening and you have these priorities at home, what would it look like for you not to stagnate while staying at your company?
ALI: I think to feel like I’m growing in my current company, I will need to change functional pipelines. I’ll need to change the parts of the company and the business that I’m supporting.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
ALI: That’s not improbable. We have very diverse career pathing. It’s not like a manufacturing company where it tends to be quite rigid, but it would take intention on my part to identify those opportunities in this new structure that I would have the competencies to come in and be able to deliver value, and it would require probably networking and support that I would need to maybe even rebuild.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. So how does that sound to you?
ALI: It sounds appealing in that it is a challenge. Going to the premise of not trying to get all 10 things or a hundred percent of what I’m looking for, but to get 50% or more, I think that this could actually be the path that I should probably go deeper in and pursue. I think the challenge that I’m facing with the restructure of my company is, I’ve lost the majority of my sponsors. They’ve retired or been exited, as well as my peers. So, people I would’ve typically approached to talk through these circumstances and help me identify where I could grow internally to continue to grow, those advocates and champions and personal board of directors, so to speak, are kind of fragile.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. So, where do you feel that leaves you?
ALI: I think it leaves me a little vulnerable in that we are a very network-based organization. So, if I don’t have the advocates and sponsors at the top, being able to articulate the strengths that I have, it’s a little bit harder to know how I would go after another functional opportunity. I feel like I can still operate within the space that I’m in, but I’m acknowledging that I don’t think I’m going to get the growth that I want by staying in the function that I’m in. So, going and looking at other opportunities across the company, I’ll have to figure out how I reactivate a network or approach it in a different way now that we’re in this new structure. And I don’t necessarily have those champions around.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s interesting to me, Ali, is when we were sort of exploring the possibility of you going external and we talked about what would be the investment there, you said, “Hey, it’d be learning a new industry, learning a new company.” And a big thing for you was building the relationships, that you wouldn’t have the foundation of those relationships to build on. It sounds to me like you’re kind of in a similar position, not exactly the same, but there’s some relationship building that needs to go on internally. So, the level of investment, again, might on the margins be slightly different, but it sounds like it requires a lift either way, whether you’re internal or external, because your company has changed.
ALI: I think you’re exactly right, and I hadn’t really thought of it that way, but the investment in relationships will be required because this is a completely different structure than my current company has had. And I think that framing is actually making external opportunities seem almost less intimidating in that maybe it really is more on par on evaluating where I can grow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. So, I think part of the framing is, we’re sort of comparing internal or external. Okay?
ALI: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s hold that. I want to offer another perspective, which is around the word growth that you’ve used. I’m just curious, how are you defining growth? What is growth for you right now? And growth for the sake of what?
ALI: I will feel like I’m growing when I’m coming into work and I’m facing a new problem that I haven’t faced before, that I’m interacting with teammates that are thinking about things in a different way or have a different perspective that’s beyond the current scope. That’s what I feel like it means to grow. And I want to solve bigger problems. I want to solve more complex problems. And that feels like that occurs when you’re at certain levels within the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you want to be challenged with different types of problems than you’re being faced with now.
ALI: Correct.
MURIEL WILKINS: You want to engage in a different way with peers. And I want to come back to that just so I can kind of crystallize what that exactly means. And you want to be able to solve more complex problems.
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, talk to me a little bit about interacting with peers in a different way. Just I may have missed it. In what different way?
ALI: So, I find that as I’ve grown in my professional career, and I do feel like I’m solving bigger problems, it’s a different skillset to influence stakeholders and to interact with peers to try to understand their priorities and be able to articulate mine and then make sure that we’re kind of building a coalition to move our organization and our teams forward together. So, I think that that is kind of what I mean by continuing to grow and to have exposure to functions that are beyond the one that I’m currently in, and influence in a broader way.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you would know that’s happening if you have exposure to other functions and you have influence, or what you’re working on has influence in a broader way in the organization.
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: The sense that that’s only possible at higher levels, where is that coming from?
ALI: I don’t think it’s possible only at higher levels. I think that it’s been more interesting in my career. The larger teams that I’ve managed and the larger scope of responsibility that I’ve been able to manage, that’s where influencing within the organization has become more important and the conversation’s more diverse, of understanding more of the macro considerations that go into business decisions.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Do you have a sense internally whether you were already positioned to be in those types of roles?
ALI: That’s a good question. I have asked for explicit feedback and haven’t really gotten a lot around what is my career progression and how does the current leadership team view my skillset and runway. But yes, I believe that I am being considered for advancements. I have had pretty good visibility across the company. I’ve been actively engaged in our employee networks and am frequently referenced as a very strong female leader within our organization. So I’ve gotten validation that I do have some of the skills and competencies that would make me a candidate for higher level roles.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. So, I’m hearing two things, right? I’m hearing, on the one hand, growth, that you want to make sure you’re growing, which you articulated new problems, different level of engagement, broader influence, and I’m hearing advancement, which advancement basically means position, title, promotion. Okay? Is there a world where there’s growth without advancement for you at the moment?
ALI: I think there is, but I hadn’t really thought that way. I think I had, in my mind, advancement meant title, scope of responsibility. But as we talk through this, being able to look at other functions that I will continue to be able to grow within, that maybe are at my same level or comparable, I think there’s something for me to explore deeper there, on if that would meet the needs that I have to continue to grow because it would certainly be different problems, because I haven’t worked in some of these spaces before. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. I mean, I think, if we go back to your original question, which is, how do I continue to grow while staying put? Which is just, I love the way that you phrased it because there’s so much to unthread there. What does the definition of growth? What does it mean to stay put? One possibility is that you can grow in the ways that you just defined what growth is while staying put at your level, because there is no advancement happening right now because of macro circumstances that are a bit out of your control. I’m not advocating for that. Certainly, I want people to be able to advance. I’m just grounding that in your original question. Right?
ALI: Yeah. And I really like this reframing because, just given the restructuring of the company, those opportunities for title advancement are fewer, but the opportunities for expanded scope of responsibility is arguably greater because we have limited organization and made it flatter and so the responsibility is a wider scope. And with my ultimate ambition, if I truly want to be a COO, understanding different parts of how our business operates could only help me in that pathway, either inside my company or outside.
MURIEL WILKINS: I wanted to go back to Ali’s original question because I think it’s a meaty one. First, we unpacked a bit more about why she felt stuck or that she had to stay put and what decisions and circumstances led her to that point. And then we could pivot to the first part of her question about growth, which required some definition. I asked her to explain what growth even means to her and if her definition of growth could change. Because at many points in anyone’s career, there’s a difference between growth and promotion. And when you see the difference, you’re able to better articulate what makes the most sense for your career path. Now that we’ve opened up the aperture, it’s time for Ali to start putting what she’s learned into practice in her role as it stands today. Let me add another layer to this, right? And again, I want to sort of think about what the internal options are. What would it look like for you to grow at your level? Just as you said, there’s increasing actually opportunities for expanded scope without necessarily moving into another level. So, what would it look like for you to take advantage of those opportunities so you can grow and at the same time position yourself for advancement when those opportunities become available?
ALI: I think I’d need to do some homework on where I saw opportunities to make cross-functional step change within my company and target those areas of opportunity. I can think that through a few spaces where that could be. I’ve found that it’s really the gray space in between functional handoffs is where value is created at my current company in particular. So, in the past, I’ve tried to go after those areas and really lead cross-functional teams to come up with new processes or to build new capabilities that help make that handoff more seamless. I think in this post-restructure space, there’s a lot of that because we’re reinventing how we’re doing our business in some spaces as well as just building new operating model across teams. So, I think that there could be opportunities for me to leverage how I’ve approached it in the past, but be retargeted of spaces within the company that I could come in and feel like I could ask the right questions to identify the value, and it would be a role that would be visible enough within the enterprise that would give me a new set of stakeholders, a new set of sponsors potentially if I performed well.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to name it. I think what you’re looking for is, I’m going to name it the double V. You’re looking for spaces where you can add value even without necessarily having had the promotion. Okay? And second V, where you also get visibility to other areas of the company. And that both those things will provide you with growth currently, based on your definition, while at the same time positioning you so that when the macro trends change and opportunities for advancement open up, you’ll be ready.
ALI: I really like that. That resonates, and I think you’ve captured exactly what I feel like I need to continue to feel like I’m growing and to also continue to be able to showcase that within the company that I work in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Okay. So, it sounds like that’s a possible strategy for if you pursued staying internally, right?
ALI: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the other option that we talked about is, well, maybe there’s a world where there’s external opportunities where, same thing, you’ve got to kind of rebuild relationships, but you would be able to sort of jump in to those problems and the nature of the business in a way that you could add value immediately. So, it’s still the same two variables, just in a different place, but within the conditions of the geographical conditions so that you wouldn’t have to move.
ALI: Yes, I do think it would be similar, if not the exact same.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, you know, Ali, I mean, what’s interesting to me is, and check me on this because I may be completely off, I’m not feeling like you have to put your career on the back burner right now. What I’m hearing is you can’t move geographically.
ALI: I think you’re right. I think especially with the reframing of not looking at growth and advancement within a level progression, but more within how am I increasing value and making that value more visible across the enterprise and myself, building my own brand, so to speak. I think that helps because it really did feel like I was not giving up everything but unable to pursue what I was wanting to pursue in my next step. I think this conversation is helping me realize that I don’t need an SVP’s title to do that right now. I can still do that at the level that I’m at, or maybe in another company, I can do that.
MURIEL WILKINS: For a certain period of time, right? I think what you’re hitting on is we often have, myself included, by the way, visions of what we want. And they are a vision, right? We see exactly what it should look like. And then the circumstances don’t align for it to look that way, and so we think we can’t have what we want. But that’s not true. You can still have what you want. It just might need to look differently. And that’s where opening the aperture up and saying, “Okay, I still want to reach the C-suite. I still want to be challenged. I still want to be excited about my work. I still want to be able to support my partner. I still want to be able to manage on the home front, but it can’t quite look like the plan that I originally had, which was that I go full throttle and my husband sort of takes a backseat for a little bit.” That’s just not what the world gave you right now. So, then you have to go to, “Okay, I still want all those things, but how do I paint the painting a bit differently to make it still a beautiful painting?”
ALI: Yes, that is spot on. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think there’s a couple of options here, and there’s probably a bunch of others in between. So, let me ask you this: What are some immediate steps that you think you can take in the next couple of weeks that will help you feel like you’re not in stagnation mode?
ALI: I think doing the assessment around where I see value creation opportunity within my company in this new formation is something that I can absolutely go after and assess. And I think that there are spaces that I could start showcasing even in the role that I’m in. So definitely doing that. I think seeking opportunities to get visibility of what leaders’ priorities are, as well as increase my own visibility by having one-on-ones or ask for opportunities to present to other functions around maybe even what my current team does, just so that I can start understanding where are those spaces that I could feel like I could grow and start getting the visibility to those and then increase my own visibility. Those are actions that I could take.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, great. So, go get them.
ALI: I love it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, that’s the only way you move, right? The opposite of stagnation is movement, is you’ve got to go after those things.
ALI: Yeah, that’s it. I just have to channel the energy to go after it.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. Okay. So how are you feeling now versus at the beginning of our conversation when you asked this question?
ALI: I feel a lot better because I have a broader definition of growth. And I think that I was really restricting myself in just having it be a title or having my aspiration be an all-or-none approach. I think that this is making me feel a lot more comfortable about the decisions that I’ve made and also hopeful that I’ll be able to continue to grow over the next couple of years.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, you won’t know unless you try, try some of those other options out and know that we’ve only even uncovered a few. So, if they’re not getting anywhere, then you sort of come back to the same questions that we just went through for yourself and say, “Okay, what other options are on my disposal?” Internal, external, kind of go through the same exercise. All right?
ALI: Yeah, yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you.
ALI: Thank you. This is fun.
MURIEL WILKINS: One thing I’ve learned as an executive coach over the years is that there are many different ways to feel stuck and many different ways to grow. For Ali, the challenge wasn’t around making a decision around priorities. In many ways, she’d already done that. Instead, the problem to tackle was how she could continue to be proactive and keep her longer-term goals in mind. A point I want to reiterate, because it applies not just here but in so many situations, is that progress is not a binary, it’s a continuum. Between zero and a hundred, there are 99 options, and just one step is movement away from staying put or being stuck. This is something that’s important to remember with all sorts of professional challenges because much about leadership isn’t all or nothing. By changing your perspective about what forward movement looks like, you can help continue building momentum in your career no matter what the momentary setbacks might be. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I was able to build relationships with my colleagues, but I think it’s just breaking the barrier with my boss is a little bit more difficult than I expected. It surprised me that I didn’t have more courage to say some of the things that should have been said.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen, to subscribe to the show and leave a five-star review. And, of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 1: How Do I Balance My Career Goals with My Company’s Needs?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that, hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sophie to protect her confidentiality. Sophie’s been with her current organization for over two decades. She’s loved the work and the people and has gained positive career traction.
SOPHIE: It’s a great company. I have been so supported, gotten so many great opportunities. They have really always been there to support me with various challenges. There’s a loyalty aspect. I also have a lot of credibility with key stakeholders, so they know that they can call me when they have concerns. I’m trusted, but at the same time, if I put on my enterprise hat, it’s really smart to keep me where I am because few have my depth and breadth in terms of experience across multiple markets and different levels of hierarchy, that I’m able to pivot, find solutions, and move things forward quickly.
MURIEL WILKINS: After moving around quite a bit and working in different parts of the world for the company, she wanted to settle in one particular country for the long term. In order to do that, she took a position outside of her finance leadership role, a job leading a strategically important project for her company where she’s been making great strides. Now, she’s ready to move back to her finance roots but also doesn’t want to move geographically, and she’s not quite sure senior leadership wants her to move on from her current role.
SOPHIE: I’d like to get back to what I consider the role where I shine the most and also the role that brings me the most happiness, and that’s in the world of finance. I’m very clear on why that role is so attractive to me, or why I enjoy it so much, because it’s one that you never master. You’re always learning new things, and I’m just a person who needs constant challenge. I’m used to aiming for a target, delivering, and then looking for the next challenge. It is on my radar, though, that there’s a pyramid effect. I have a level of senior leadership. It’s not like there are so many roles at my level. It could be that there’s a challenge of meeting my need.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sophie reached the height of her career that many don’t achieve, but now she finds herself in a role that she didn’t intend to have forever and wondering about how to get back to where she wants to be while also balancing the needs of the company. I started the coaching conversation by asking her, “If she did move back into her senior finance leadership role, what would the impact be on her organization?”
SOPHIE: I think the impact would be, they have to replace me for a big market. For example, the US is a huge market, and I’m the person who is helping guide that, and that is absolutely a place where they would need to succeed. So how do you get somebody able to replace me? What’s good is, I have a track record. Because I moved so many times with the company. I have a track record of selecting my successor, developing my successor, and then leaving the business in good hands. That’s something that we could absolutely plan together, so I don’t see a reason that I couldn’t be replaced. Everyone’s replaceable, and I am able to absolutely do that. I’m also big on business continuity, so whatever’s in my head, it’s in other heads as well. I think what I bring is, I am able to be just so quick and agile because I have this incredible frame of reference where when I receive things, I can immediately make connections, but it’s the CFO role or the finance role that allowed me to have that. There’s an interdependence there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What’s getting in the way of you moving back into a finance role?
SOPHIE: I think it’s two things. I think that right now there isn’t one for me, and I think that they’re very happy with where I am, and from an enterprise perspective, it makes sense. So, they said, “Please do this for another two to three years, and we’ve heard you. We’ll find a solution.” I would say the pressure comes from my side and just my own business knowledge. I’ve been on this project for three years. Out of the finance role, two more years. What’s my market value? Just from a captain of my careership perspective and I have my own ownership there. I don’t believe in victim mindset or anything. I have a role to play, and so how do I ensure that I stay motivated because I’m ready for the new challenge, in a way? I have this project running, and I want to get back to an area where I feel I have the greatest impact, and I think that’s another point to add. I am able to really bring positive impact wherever I go. That’s my belief and it’s just I can do more elsewhere than where I’m doing it here.
MURIEL WILKINS: According to whom?
SOPHIE: I think it’s according to me. It’s to the point that I’m doing side projects on top of this project, and one that I’m leading right now is getting a lot of positive publicity, so it’s showing that I can connect dots and make things happen, and it can be something that really is positive for the company and beyond the company. That I’m doing this on the side because I’m a person who believes in using my time really to make this world a better place, I’m hoping is one of the things that will show them I can do more than I’m doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, and so what conversations have you had about that, that you can do more than what you’re doing?
SOPHIE: I have had it with my boss and a couple of mentors, and so they are encouraging me to have conversations with senior leadership, which I’m doing, but the feedback has been, “This is really great. We are really glad you’re here. We hear you. Continue doing what you’re doing.”
MURIEL WILKINS: When you’re having those conversations, give me a little insight. What do they sound like? Are you saying, “Hey, I can do more?” Are you saying, “Hey, here’s what I can do. Here’s some ideas about what I could do”? Are you pitching something to them, or are you asking them?
SOPHIE: You’re right, I’m not pitching.
MURIEL WILKINS: Don’t tell me I’m right. I didn’t say anything. I asked you a question.
SOPHIE: You asked me the question, and you’re right. I did not pitch. No, I’ll say that it’s exactly that. I did not pitch. I said I would like to return to finance. I feel I can add more value there. I am absolutely motivated, and you can count on me to do what I’m doing, get these things done, but I’d like to find a way back, and I did this a couple of months ago, so I’m slowly doing this. Why I am talking to you now is, I’m wondering if I should not go stronger.
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you think?
SOPHIE: I think yes, I think yes, and that’s scary because I need to be prepared that it will be, “No, we need you here.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so the question is, Do I advocate for myself more strongly in terms of what I want to be doing at this company, where I think I can add the most value, and where I think I can make an impact while still maintaining my interest? But should I advocate that strongly because, oh my goodness, they might say no?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: If they say no, what happens?
SOPHIE: It gets awkward.
MURIEL WILKINS: How is it awkward?
SOPHIE: Because it will be very clear that this is not enough. I need more.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’ll be clear to who.
SOPHIE: I think it’ll be clear to my current leadership, my current manager.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, and what’s awkward about that?
SOPHIE: They need me just from a personal, like I said, enterprise thinking, self-interest. They need me to do what I’m doing and I really like and respect them. So I don’t want any bad feelings. Really, they’re good people. So how do I… Again, it’s this navigating so that they win too. I want them to be successful. I want this project to be successful.
MURIEL WILKINS: But they’re already winning. Can we just assert that? They’re already winning by you doing a fantastic job that it sounds like you’re doing.
SOPHIE: You’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Nobody’s telling you to go anywhere. They’re saying, “No, we want to keep you here. We hear you, but you’re adding value here. Please, please stay.” So they’re already winning. What I’m trying to understand is, what would be different than where you are now if they said no?
SOPHIE: I’m wondering if it wouldn’t impact their trust in me. It would have an impact on my thinking of my future with them because I’m not somebody who would just be like, “Okay, thanks.” No, I’m a person who needs to move forward. I need constant challenge.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you said that you’re already operating with a high level of trust with them. I believe you said, at the beginning of our conversation. So what do you think it is about this type of conversation? Are you advocating for yourself and your opportunities that you think would erode trust or the level of trust that you already have?
SOPHIE: Maybe it’s because I project what I would myself do. If I have someone whom I really am so grateful to have and the team or even that I know is adding a lot of value where he or she is, and that person came to me and said, “I need to do something else.” I would actually help the person get to where he or she wants to go because I believe that’s the only way. I would also start actively recruiting or starting to put together how I would replace the person.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, replace the person even if they were still there, or replace the person if they left?
SOPHIE: Because I would be doing the two in tandem, I would try to be helping the person get onto a new role. I would start saying, “Okay, we need to think about business continuity and what that means.” And outlining how it would be to replace that person. I would also, in my mind, think that that person might be looking on the outside and could leave me. So I need to be prepared.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, and so help me understand what is awkward about that because you called it awkward.
SOPHIE: I just play it out like chess moves. So it could be that they find someone to replace me before I find something else and I’m out of a job.
MURIEL WILKINS: But then, if you’re playing it out like chess moves, then you’re not staying aligned to what you said, your goal is in all this is to make it win-win.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you’re playing it out like chess moves, you’re assuming there’s a win-lose and that one party comes out on top. So, you have to decide, are you playing this out as a chess game or, as one of my dear friends once said, “There is no win-win.” He said, “There’s win some, win some.” So if you were to approach this from an I win-some, you win-some enterprise senior leadership, what would that look like, how would you approach it?
SOPHIE: How would I approach it? I think I’d actually put that on the table. I’d say, “I know I need to move back to finance and I think I would have a greater impact there, and I also know that this project is so strategic and important and I really care about its success, so I’d like to work with you to see how we could each win some in this process. I would absolutely be someone who can help you find the person who can replace me, and I also understand maybe needing to wait until such a finance role is available for me at my level. So how could we move this forward together?” And so, there’s this notion of starting it. It’s how do we keep it going and make sure that actions follow such words.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so what I’m hearing is a bit of a different stance. In the former, you were laying out the problem, which is, I want to move back to finance, and hoping they were going to come with a solution that pleased you, and their solution was, “Yeah, no, because that doesn’t work for us. We don’t even want to face that right now. It would mean X, Y, and Z.” And what you’re now suggesting is taking a more proactive stance and saying, “Hey, here’s the problem or the issue. I would like to move back to finance, and I want to make sure that the value that’s been created in this project continues so that nothing is disrupted on your side. Therefore, here’s what I propose. I will work to make sure there’s a succession plan in place. I will activate that plan. I will make sure there is continuity in terms of my replacement. I’m not going to leave you hanging tomorrow. We can orchestrate a timeline, and at the same time, my ask is, ‘Can we start making concrete what some of these other finance opportunities might be?’“
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when I spell it out like that, how does that land with you, particularly relative to what you’ve done so far?
SOPHIE: This seems indeed possible actually to take this approach. I think where I do see the challenge is, what if there isn’t a finance role for me? There are circumstances. There has been recent restructuring and these kinds of things, and like any big company, there’s a lot of evolution happening right now in structures, and this ambiguity about the future doesn’t help. So what if there isn’t? And I think that’s one of the things that maybe has made me stuck.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So what if there isn’t?
SOPHIE: If there isn’t, I don’t want to get to that point of separation. But I think that might be one of the things we have to consider, and I think that’s probably the thing that scares me the most.
MURIEL WILKINS: So is separation, meaning leaving the company – that’s what you’re referring to?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Leaving the company – is that an option for you at all?
SOPHIE: It’s always an option. It’s always an option. I am also aware that this company is where I have the great and impactful network. This company is really great to me, so it’s this loyalty aspect that I carry, and stepping back, I am a business person. I know in finance I’ve absolutely been on the end of having to do these kinds of activities so I can have the rational understanding around it.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s this question of, at what point does the loyalty to the company override the loyalty to yourself? And I don’t know what that is. For some people, that’s every single day. For others, it’s at the point of, I need to actually leave and pursue my own role somewhere else. Because right now, your loyalty to yourself and your loyalty to the company have been aligned, or up to this point, they have been for the most part, right?
SOPHIE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now, it feels like, “Huh, if I stay true to what I want, it might not necessarily align with what the company can provide.”
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you were mentoring someone and they came to that scenario, what would you mentor them to do?
SOPHIE: I would mentor them to really listen to themselves because that’s the one thing you really know, is yourself, and then probably the one thing you control is your own actions, reactions to things. I would counsel to do your homework to get really clear on what it is that you want and the why, which is what I’ve been doing. I would counsel them to speak to trusted mentors, but ultimately, it comes back to the person. In the end, only I can decide what is best for me, and it does mean taking risks.
MURIEL WILKINS: What kind of risks?
SOPHIE: For the outcome that I just suggested. That, what if it doesn’t work out? And that means that I have to pivot and the solution is either stay where you’re at or it’s out. Again, I’m still reflecting on your point. It’s there. I have to see how we can make this win some, win some.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, in a way, you’re… There’s a couple of things there. One is this, you have to think about what you want, and I want to reflect on that a little bit because you either need to change what it is that you want to make it align or you stick to what you think you want, and if it’s not met at the organization, then yeah, you have your answer. Then, you decide, I’ll still stay because I have other reasons to stay, which is fine. There is no right or wrong. You can still stay, but you have to have a reason to. So there’s that part, and then there’s looking at this as one or the other. It’s either I move back to the finance role here, and the only other option if they say no or that there is no finance role is that I might have to look elsewhere. There is probably some things in between. There might be, “Oh, there’s no finance role now, but maybe there will be in the next X period of time, and so I’m going to give it X period of time.”
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Or maybe it again goes back to what I want, and seeing, is there something that might not be in the situation that I’m in now, but that is also not the finance role that still fulfills my needs of what I want? So that last piece is important because you said, “Hey, a part of this is, I need to kick the tire on what it is that I want.” Let’s take a moment now to pause and digest a bit of where we are so far in the coaching conversation. Sophie is someone who’s been with her company a long time and found what seemed to be her ideal career path in finance. She’s a team player and willing to go above and beyond for a company that she feels has treated her well, but after some time in a strategic role that isn’t really her passion, she’s trying to find ways to get back to finance. While she knows what she wants, she also understands the company view. That if she’s doing a valuable job where she is now, why should they move her back to finance? So far in the conversation, we’ve been circling around these seemingly conflicting agendas, and it’s clear that Sophie sees the options in front of her as mutually exclusive from one another, but we’ve now introduced the idea that maybe she has more choice than she originally thought. Maybe she has more options to consider that she has yet to explore. To help her figure out what those might be, I encouraged her to think more broadly about what she wants in her next role. I ask her to set aside the title of finance and describe what it is that she’s not getting now that she wants.
SOPHIE: The finance role is close to business.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So you want to be close to the business.
SOPHIE: Yeah, it’s very much about value creation, not from a creative sense. It’s value creation from investing and getting a return on investment, whether you invest time, resources, money to develop an idea to help a business grow, and there’s an aspect to that that’s very real. You are out meeting customers and seeing the impact you have in the market daily.
MURIEL WILKINS: This isn’t a finance role?
SOPHIE: Yes. What makes the finance role, or what makes it, what I would say, in my experience, different from others, is that this is not a finances in the markets’ role. It’s a finance and how the company is able, so you get this view of the company, you see how all the pieces work together, you have this view across all of the functions that is super interesting and fascinating. So it’s, one, I love that perspective, seeing businesses as a whole and then being able to, I call it, zoom in, zoom out. So zoom in, and you see the different parts, and you know how they work together, and you know how to make a company move forward. That is exciting. It’s hard and exciting, and it just seems so much realer than a project.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s just take a step back for a second. Because what I asked you is, help me understand what it is that you want but not in the form of a finance role. What you went back to is, this is what a finance role gives me.
SOPHIE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s a level of attachment to “finance role equals happiness” that I would like for you to put aside for a minute. I’m sure it does equal ecstasy for you. It did not, for me, in business school, but I honor and respect the joy you find in the finance world, so I understand that, but, all jokes aside, what I’m getting at is, if you stay attached to, the only way I can get these things – be close to the business, value creation, ability to zoom in and zoom out, be challenged… if you stay attached to, the only way I can get that is through a finance role, it is going to be hard for you to see that in between. What else might be possible beyond the dichotomy of, I’m either in a finance role or I’m in this project? We already asserted, there has to be something else to at least entertain. It doesn’t mean it’s what you have to do, but to at least entertain.
SOPHIE: No, you’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You’re saying I’m… What am I right about?
SOPHIE: It is not limited to the finance role. What could bring me happiness? I’ve already shown I’m able to go into different areas, commercial execution, actually, whatever you throw at me. Thus far, knock on wood, I meet the challenge, survive, and then thrive. That said, maybe it’s because I can articulate, say, a finance role that transmits that idea or thinking to others, and I don’t have a name for that other side you’re saying of a role where you create value, you’re close to the business, and you’re able to be challenged. Maybe it is something I need to investigate, like, what does business development do? What falls under that title, or what are the real activities there?
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, I’m not suggesting at all that you need to abandon a finance leadership role and returning to that. What we’re doing is trying to articulate what all the different choices and options are in front of you before you really need to face whether this is a decision of loyalty and do I stay with this company or not. So I think the question is, if you are clear about what your wants are and the type of impact that you’d like to have, what are the ways that you possibly could express those within your current organization if finance is not what’s possible right now? And I know that might put additional work in terms of figuring that out, the answer is either going to give you more clarity on whether finance is really it and you don’t want to do anything else but that, or whether there are other options at the company or whether it’s really time to go. It’s like, have you really exhausted the possibilities? And I don’t know.
SOPHIE: I don’t think I have. I think that because I have such a strong relationship with the finance function, I generally like all of the people. I have great mentors and supporters in that organization, friends, that it obviously is shaping my thinking, but I do have to step back and say, “What is it I like about finance?” Some of which I have said here. I know where that… It brings me joy. It’s a natural energy. I’m excited to do it and see, are there other areas where I can add value. Because in the end, what is truly driving me is positive impact. I want to move things forward in a positive way. Wherever I go, I will. I think I can do a greater impact outside of where I am today. If it’s not possible to do in finance, which is my comfort zone and also my network zone, are there other areas? Because I think the limitation I have now that I never had in the past is, I don’t want to move again, and I’ve moved multiple times to follow the roles. The situation here is that now I don’t want to move because I have a really full life that happened because I was on this project as well. Because I was able to get involved in things beyond what I normally had going on professionally or even in a professional sense, I’m able to do other interesting things for the company.
MURIEL WILKINS: So that’s another boundary that you’re creating, right?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: At the end of the day, I think you need to list out all the things that you want and then realize that there are choices to be made around which is most important for you right now.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It doesn’t mean forever, but for now – and that’s your reason for doing whatever it is that you do. Do you push and advocate for the next role? Do you stay in the project role? Do you try to find something that keeps you at the company and keeps you in the US but gets you out of the project?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is bubbling up at the top of the list? It’s like if I said, you’ll relate to this because you said you’ve moved to a lot of different countries, you’ve seen the world. It would be like if I said, “Oh, my top priority is that I live in warm weather. It has to be warm weather, and it has to be someplace that within an hour, an hour and a half, I can be close to water. I can be at water.”
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, that rules out a bunch of things. Let’s put certain areas out of the equation, but it also includes a lot of things, but then I can’t say, “Oh, and by the way, but I only want to live in this little island in the Caribbean.”
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I could. That’s your finance version.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, which one is it? Is it that you really just want to live in warm weather and close to water, or is it that you just want to live on that little island?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It doesn’t matter. Just pick one and then understand what the consequences are of picking that one, “Oh, Muriel, guess what? That little island actually gets hurricanes a couple of times a year.” Are you good with that? “No, no, I don’t want hurricanes.” Okay, then which one do you want?
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m originally from the Caribbean, so I can say that. I do want my little island, but you get what I’m saying.
SOPHIE: Yes, I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you have to see that there’s a trade-off in all of it, and the question really is, what are the trade-offs that you are willing to make that make you feel at peace with where you are now, like you have won some and that the company has won some as well?
SOPHIE: No, this is great. This is really great. It means I have some more homework to do. But I’ve been thinking in this direction, and you’re helping me see it very clearly of the way forward. That I just need to get clear with myself, and I think that’s part of the loyalty aspect. I also want to make it easy for them, my company. I want to be able to make it so that it’s not complicated. It’s not, she’s getting difficult or I want to keep a really good relationship and show that I’m trying to do this really in a good way for everybody, but that I know that I need to do something.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is there any evidence that you’ve ever made it hard or difficult for the company?
SOPHIE: I don’t think there’s any evidence that I’ve been difficult. I would actually say I’ve got a lot of examples of being the team player and taking one for the team, but I do know that I’ve heard it said of others, and maybe that’s what…
MURIEL WILKINS: But you’re not others.
SOPHIE: I know. Yeah, that’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: Your track record, and I don’t know. I don’t have the luxury of, right now, talking to a bunch of folks to find out, “Okay, really, tell me, is Sohpie the difficult person?” And she just doesn’t know. She has a low level of self-awareness, but you have been there decades, held leadership roles, and been put in different roles. So my hypothesis, again, I might be wrong, is that your reputation is not of the difficult person, and one ask, one-self advocating is not what’s going to completely turn it around.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, is it really about making it difficult for them, or is it about how this might feel uncomfortable to you?
SOPHIE: I do think I care about making it difficult for them, but I also think the second point is correct. I am not feeling comfortable with that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SOPHIE: It is something to sit in, so it’s scary.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so I think what you lead with is how it’s going to be received, and so it’s not an, “Oh, they don’t feel uncomfortable.” You’re the one who feels uncomfortable. If you lead with discomfort, as though this is scary, as though this is difficult, and this is filled with angst, that’s how it’s going to be received. So what can you do to make it less scary, less uncomfortable, less difficult for you so that, as a result, you can lead this process with them in a similar way? What do you need to do to bring the difficulty level down for yourself?
SOPHIE: I think already articulating that fear with you here today, that’s the first major breakthrough about it because it’s not something I’m discussing… You can discuss easily with others. I have a trusted mentor who maybe has some of this background, but overall, no. So, it’s been a lot in my own head and then connecting and doing reconnaissance of understanding what the marketplace looks like with friends and just to be able to make informed decisions, but just saying it out loud today and being this vulnerable with you is really what the only way out is through. I have to work this out so that I get to that good state, as you say, to be able to meet them in a good headspace so that we really can win some, win some.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, there’s a bit of, if you believe the opportunity can be worked out, you’re going to go into it with that conviction. My sense is, right now, you’re not sure if there is a win-win, win some, win some. At first you were like, “This is a win-lose.” So, you were going into it that way, but if you have conviction that there is a solution here, that will change the way that you approach it, and I think what it will do will support what we talked about a little bit ago, which is going in with a proposal or with some proposals rather than the ask.
SOPHIE: Yeah, and I think that is very valuable because when you can come with potential solutions, I can address their concern about this project because it’s normal. In the end, the company needs to succeed, and if I can say, “It will succeed with this solution, and I will be there to help make sure that it does succeed.” Then I think they too would be in much more of an area of wanting to help me get there because then I’m helping them not have another challenge. We have enough challenge with just doing business in the markets, so we don’t need internal challenges further complicating things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I think you’re in a situation where you have to go in with the, “Let me help you help me.”
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. We’ve covered quite a bit. I’d love to hear what your next steps are, because I think that’s what will get you closer to where you want to be.
SOPHIE: In terms of next steps, I think I need to list out what is important to me and make it a pretty exhaustive, like where I live now is important to me, what activities I’m doing are important to me, but get clear on what those activities are. Then prioritize them. Weight them in terms of, what is the absolute non-negotiable, and where could I be flexible? Doing that exercise already for myself would then allow me to shape the way I’m looking at what could be a viable next step. It’s really great that you pointed out my own limited thinking of finance only. I prefer it in finance, but it may be, I need to show some flexibility around it because, it may be, that’s not what’s available at the time that I’m available, so I have to factor that in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so that goes on your list.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It goes on your list.
SOPHIE: Once I get clear in my own head so I don’t waste others’ time and I’m really in a position to start talking about what I’m seeing as options or solutions, I think then I could engage because I’ll be in a different place. The energy will be different because I’ll be different. I’ll be ready to take on this challenge and see how we get to solutions. So in a way, it’s turning us into our business challenges that we have. That the challenges is me, my impact, and how I can be better in a way that’s sustainable for the project.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh my god, I love that because you love a challenge.
SOPHIE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: So yes. If you treat yourself as though this is a business challenge, just as you do in every other aspect of your professional life, approach it with the same level of conviction, curiosity, tenacity until you’re able to get to a resolution.
SOPHIE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I know we didn’t come out with an answer of, should you stay or should you go, because I don’t quite think that’s where you are.
SOPHIE: I would agree.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think there’s some steps before you get to that place.
SOPHIE: I would agree. I know what I’d like, but I would say that, like, it needs to be more informed. I really need to go through and get super clear on my priorities, and then see what’s possible.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, and then see what’s possible. Okay. Terrific. Thank you.
SOPHIE: Thank you so much, Muriel. I got out even more than I thought, and I had really good expectations because I’ve seen the magic you’ve been able to work, and I really feel that-
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, it’s your magic.
SOPHIE: … I’ve gotten it here, though.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re the one doing the magic here, for sure. At the start of this coaching conversation, there was a bit of a ping pong match happening within Sophie between what she wanted for her career and what she thinks senior leadership wanted from her, and the fear of what might happen if she advocated for herself, the risk of having to face the possibility that there is no intersection between what she wants and what the company wants. This can be an incredibly difficult inflection point for someone, especially if they, like Sophie, have loyalty to their organization, which is why it’s always important, at every step of one’s career, to find that sweet spot where what you and your company values align enough. It doesn’t need to be 100% – just enough that it makes sense to keep the interdependent relationship going. When it doesn’t align, many people think it automatically means they should just resign themselves to that or should just leave. The reality is, with some due diligence, they may see that other options are available to them, just as Sophie has. Only then is it possible to advocate for your interests productively by proposing solutions that are amenable to both you and your senior leadership, rather than just asking and hoping for the best. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders.
Next time.
EPISODE 2 GUEST: It’s like, Okay, yeah, I know I can move the needle, I can chalk up some wins, I can help people grow, I can get some things done, but at the end of the day, at the end of the month, at the end of the quarter, and at the end of the year, there’s got to be something left.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to, subscribe to the show, and leave a five-star review. Of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community, where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe, sound editor Nick Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: How Do I Handle It When I Disagree with My Boss’s Decisions?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Adam to protect his confidentiality. He began his career on a pretty typical trajectory in the business world: working for a few years, getting a business degree, and then on to the next best opportunity.
ADAM: I’ve always had a major love for finance, and I’m very ambitious. School gave me the opportunity to then make a pivot, and that pivot is what then took me overseas. And going overseas, what I discovered was culturally I was much more connected, I felt much more purpose-driven in picking up that role. It’s much easier for you to navigate that corporate ladder being overseas, especially in a small market. I was able to successfully get promoted into my current role, which is C-suite level.
MURIEL WILKINS: When Adam started his most recent role, he had a plan to help him realize his ambitions.
ADAM: I think at first, I was very optimistic about what I could achieve. In much of my career, I’ve kind of been a change agent. So, I approached it more so from the standpoint of there were some big-ticket things that we needed to do around culture, there were some things that we needed to do around the operating performance of the company. I had a number of things that I wanted to do, but key among them was the trust part, was a little bit more difficult for me to accomplish with my boss. I was able to build relationships with my colleagues, but I think it’s just breaking the barrier with my boss is a little bit more difficult than I expected. It’s less about the dynamic with my boss. It’s really just how I approach the dynamic taking an effect on me, and really how I showed up in certain interactions as a result of that dynamic. It surprised me that I didn’t have more courage to say some of the things that should have been said.
MURIEL WILKINS: Adam has always been on a quest to learn more, and that’s helped him succeed. But now he’s finding himself in a place where relationships matter more than ever, and he wants to work on how to improve communication with those above him. I wanted to get more clarity on where he thinks he needs the most work, so we’ll start there.
ADAM: For me at least the further up in my career I go, I have to move away from this notion of trying to please people either above me or below me, and essentially either learn or get the maturity needed sometimes to make difficult decisions, sometimes to confront situations I think with kind of a head-on perspective as opposed to more of a passive position where I look at the big picture and say, “Well, this thing is temporary and it will pass.” But I think I need that maturity in my career to essentially deal with difficult situations, but also just to ensure that I am not allowing, I suppose, myself, to fall into this trap where sometimes I choose not to confront situations that I need to.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, is that the trap that you’re in right now?
ADAM: I think so. My career advancement has moved so rapidly that I am now trusted into some of these positions where I have to also make sure that my maturity level gets up to that point as well. And in certain situations that I think at the core of me, I should have acted better or should have acted different, I’m not seeing that for myself. So, it is a trap.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it, yeah. So, great that you are recognizing that there’s a dissonance between maybe what the situation requires of you and what you are bringing to it or not bringing to it. But we’ll test that out and see whether it is actually a maturity issue or maybe it’s a cultural issue, or in terms of the organizational context that you’re in, who knows? So, I sort of said is that the trap you’re in, but you tell me what brought you to coaching today?
ADAM: I think for me, the main thing was I recently was appointed to a senior executive role within my organization. Essentially, it required me to take on a very expansive portfolio. And unfortunately for me, the support system that typically you would get with such an appointment and the relationships that you need ultimately to culture and to develop with my boss, it wasn’t there.
I was really questioning whether or not that was me, something that I was doing, whether something I lacked, I wasn’t showing up in meetings or overall, whether it was just maybe a matter of style. And I’ve had relationships with my bosses before that weren’t a hundred percent, but you still managed to do the work. But in this new position, there were certain responsibilities that were trusted upon me. And I was required to be a certain person in some of those situations with this dynamic around me and my boss not necessarily having a good relationship.
But I should have put that aspect aside and still showed up. And the fact that I didn’t show up made me reflect and think, “Well, why is it that you’re acting different in this situation? What ultimately is causing you not to show up?” It felt like The Wizard of Oz and I’m the lion who’s chasing courage or trying to understand where his courage is. Because in that moment, I would’ve pegged myself to be more courageous.
I think for me, one of the things I have to figure out is does the context here matter. Is that something that’s deep within me that I need to work on to figure out that? Or is it just more contextual in the sense that there were other things at play here that really kind of played on the way that I showed up, and that’s a part I’m hoping that I can uncover.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, the lion is my favorite character, especially in
The Wiz
.
ADAM: Yes, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so let me make sure I grasp the situation. It sounds like up until sort of this chapter in your career, you’ve been able to manage relationships with your bosses, even if they weren’t the best of relationships. Now you’re in a situation, senior role, have been accelerated in your career quite quickly, and there seem to be some rough patches with your boss. And at the same time, what you’re experiencing is that you’re not showing up in certain situations in the way that you would expect yourself to show up.
ADAM: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so the question is are those two things correlated, right? Are you being impacted by the relationship with your boss in the way that you’re now leading? Which would be new for you because in the past you felt like you weren’t impacted, you were sort of able to go on and do what you do.
ADAM: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And then the question also for you is, am I the problem? Is something happening with me that’s causing me to show up the way, and we haven’t gotten into yet how you’re showing up, but to show up the way that I show up as the lion, right? Or is it because of what’s happening around me that is causing me to do it that way?
ADAM: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, let me give you a little preview before we kind of unpack it because you said is it context. Well, context always matters. You’re not leading in a vacuum. And what might make you effective in one context isn’t necessarily what’s going to make you effective in another context. And so, yes, does context matter? Absolutely. Is context the only thing that matters? No, because you are in that context. Other people are in that context.
And so there’s a saying, I didn’t make this up, but I will repeat it, which is every dynamic is co-created. Everything is co-created. But you’re the one sitting in front of me, not your boss, not your peers. I don’t have the whole organization here. We’ll take that into consideration. But you’re the one sitting in front of me, so what we’re going to deal with is what is the part that you own in whatever dynamic is happening.
ADAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right? So, do you own the whole thing? Nobody really owns everything. You are operating within a context and you are probably reacting to it, but that is probably part of what you can manage. Okay?
ADAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you said what didn’t meet your expectations is how you showed up in certain situations. What is it about the way that you showed up that didn’t align with what you would expect of yourself?
ADAM: So, the way that I typically process information is really to see different angles. So, key decisions, I kind of run them through these three different scenarios, obviously your optimal scenario, your base case scenario, and then your worst case scenario. And I always make sure that I kind of think about maybe some of the small things. You think about the big things, but then you narrow in on the small things. And then really kind of run those things through, again, maybe another set of scenarios.
So, what I was finding was that decisions were being made around me. I was part of that decision-making process. And I couldn’t influence the process in a way that would help the entire room to benefit from looking at these different scenarios, or I didn’t influence it. I would interject and rarely say a few things that would give some of that perspective, but I never really … I typically will stick to my gun and make sure that, okay, guys, you understand we’re doing this. This is what we’re doing, this is what are the potential blowbacks. Tell me how could we deal with this? And that was not happening in these situations. And they were impacting people’s lives, they were impacting the organization. And I just felt that I was not really putting my best foot forward leading. I was almost being influenced either by the process or just didn’t really show up as I typically would really to allow the best decisions to be made.
MURIEL WILKINS: And why is this, before we get into it further, why is this bothering you now?
ADAM: Well, it’s bothering me primarily because we were dealing with people’s lives. Some of these decisions that we made impacted my staff, and that weighs on me more than anything else. The numbers, if we excel one year and we don’t excel the next year, I can always pull myself from off the ground. But one of the things I struggle with is either disappointing people or people being, I suppose, jaded by the type of leader that I am or the leadership team that I form part of. So, that to me played a significant role on my psyche because I felt like I could have influenced the decisions a lot more.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, you felt like you could have influenced the decision a lot more. Let’s be a little bit more specific. What do you think would have happened if you had acted differently, shown up differently than what you did? What’s the different ending to the story?
ADAM: I think the Hollywood version, it’s that everyone would just come to my perspective and maybe some of those things would’ve been incorporated. But I see your point.
MURIEL WILKINS: I didn’t make a point. I just asked you a question, Adam.
ADAM: I was hopeful that in some of those situations, maybe human element could have been factored into the decisions, and ultimately maybe decisions were either more incremental or more employee-centric, more thought about the impact of the employee. So, in the ideal world, I was hoping that maybe the decision could have been altered in such a way to centrally allow for less of an impact on the employees.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, that would’ve been one possibility, the Hollywood version, that you would’ve shown up the way that you expected yourself to you. We haven’t again gotten into the tactics, but you would’ve done whatever magical influencing you think you should have done. And there would’ve been a happily ever after ending, and nobody would be disappointed, everybody would be happy, et cetera. Okay, so that’s one version.
Is there a version where you could have done the same magical influencing act and there would have been a different ending?
ADAM: Yes, absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: What could that ending be?
ADAM: The same exact ending that ended up happening.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. So, I’m pointing this out because I think that it’s important not to confuse whether it’s the outcome that you’re disappointed in, which you’re disappointed in the outcome for sure. But whether it’s the outcome that you can control or whether it’s your way of influencing that you can control. And I think what’s happening is you jumped from if only I had shown up a certain way, and then you went from that to if I had shown up that way, then X would’ve happened, the magical happily ever after ending. And that’s not necessarily true. It could have, but it also could have not. You don’t have that much power.
ADAM: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sorry, I hate to say it to you. If you do, tell me because then I’ll have you influence everybody I know.
ADAM: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: You can’t guarantee the outcome.
ADAM: You’re absolutely right. And it’s funny because I think the latter outcome, I could see that happening much more than the version that I hoped for. Because like you said, it’s essentially influencing the room.
MURIEL WILKINS: When first approaching this coaching conversation with Adam, it seemed like a large part of his challenge was about the dynamic between him and the leaders of the organization. Whenever I start a coaching session that seems to center around interpersonal issues, I like to make it clear all dynamics between people are co-created. But when I’m only coaching one person, that’s the only set of the equation we can work on and try to change.
This seems like something Adam already understood as he freely spoke about disappointment and regret around his own behavior at work. Without focusing too much on the specific circumstances, it’s clear that Adam wishes he had handled certain situations differently. So, the first distinction to make was about whether he was disappointed in his own actions, his ability to influence, or the outcome. That distinction is important because it helps us focus on what is and isn’t in his control. I wanted to dig into how he views influencing a bit more, so we went down that path as I asked him to define the word.
ADAM: I suppose for me it’s presenting your arguments, your arguments being essentially crisp, data-driven, but also having the conviction and the belief in the arguments that I’m making, and essentially convincing my peers to go along with something that I’ve laid out for them.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, how do you know if you have been successful at influencing or not?
ADAM: In the work context, it typically redounds to committee then makes a decision. So, does the committee kind of move in a direction, let’s say for example, opposite to the view that I was proposing? So, typically, if the committee decides that they’re going to go opposite to me, I kind of feel like I missed the mark. If they’re convinced by my arguments, I’ve convinced them.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so let me offer a little bit of a different way or maybe parse apart different responsibilities. One responsibility can be influencing something, influencing the outcome or the process, let’s talk about the process that will get to an outcome. Then there’s another responsibility, which is the decision-making responsibility. The decision-making responsibility has how much control over the outcome?
ADAM: I think a significant portion, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, right? Whoever decides, they’re the ones saying we’re doing this or we’re doing that. The influencing responsibility has how much control over the outcome?
ADAM: Significantly less, probably definitely in the minority.
MURIEL WILKINS: Definitely less. To what degree? I don’t know, but less than the decision-maker. So, what I’m hearing is you weren’t the decision-maker.
ADAM: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: You were the influencer. And yet you are placing the same success criteria on what I would see for a decision-maker. Did I make the right decision or not? It’s pure, I can see it. If I say yes, then that is a hundred percent. If I say no, then it goes in the other direction. Versus influencing, which is more about increasing the chances that someone or people will go in your direction. It’s more about the effort that you place in that process rather than the actual outcome. So, is there a scenario where you have been able to look at yourself over the span of your career where you said, “You know what? I believe I did the best that I could in terms of influencing the outcome, even though it didn’t go my way.”
ADAM: Yeah, I have plenty of examples like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: You have plenty of examples, okay.
ADAM: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is the difference here?
ADAM: I suppose it’s the seniority in my level. I worked as an analyst where my decisions, essentially I would have to take my recommendations to committee. I would essentially make recommendations. I would work long hours and make my case, but ultimately, many times portfolio managers would go the other way. But in this instance, it just kind of feels itself to me like there was a lot more riding on my ability to influence.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, which is fine. I think it’s just let’s be clear, you didn’t own the decision though.
ADAM: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, now let’s go back to the if there was room, if you feel like I actually could have done more, there was more to be done in influencing that maybe would’ve swayed the decision, let’s go back to that to see what that is. So, you said earlier on that I couldn’t influence the decision and then you said I didn’t influence the decision. Which one do you believe it is? Is it that you couldn’t influence in the way that you think you should or that you didn’t influence in the way you should?
ADAM: I would say definitely didn’t. Because couldn’t would mean that there was no discussion, no forum. That wasn’t what I was trying to say. Certainly is that I didn’t. So, there was a forum where, like you said, decisions were being discussed, but I didn’t.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And when I hear the difference between couldn’t and didn’t, you tell me if that resonates with you. When I hear I could not do this, I think about I don’t have the capability to do it. I couldn’t ride that bike because I don’t know how to ride a bike. I didn’t ride the bike, inherent in that to me is a choice. It’s I know how to ride a bike, but I didn’t do it. For whatever reason, I didn’t ride the bike today. In this particular case, what is it that you recognize you didn’t do that you could have done?
ADAM: Yeah, so I think for me, certainly I feel like I wasn’t passionate about why I felt there should have been other alternative options being considered. So, that’s one. Two, to be candid, I would say I wasn’t appeared to really kind of think through, okay, so if somebody counters on a point, have you thought about what your response might have been to anything or if somebody raises the question around information you’re providing. I may have been somewhat under-prepared and was probably relying more so on just really hoping to influence the process maybe out of goodness of people’s heart. Or really just here’s my view, it’s a very humble view. So, I wasn’t as methodical as I should have been in presenting my case.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I’m going to rename it a little bit and say you weren’t being strategic. You were sort of using magical thinking, which is of course people are going to think with the goodness of their hearts or of course they’re going to think the way that I think. So, there’s a bit of a strategy part of this, which is the preparation. How do I approach this based on where the context is, how people are going to respond?
And when you name those two things in terms of what you didn’t do was be as passionate about why you felt the other scenarios should be considered more and you didn’t prepare to a place where you could respond to some of the other arguments that were being made, what got in the way of those two things?
ADAM: There is a lot of context to the decision that was being taken. There were a lot of context to that. And what I mean by that is that you mentioned these decisions don’t happen in a void. There was this feeling that the decision was biased towards a different group of people, which I didn’t necessarily have the context of that. So, I wasn’t as passionate as to say if I hadn’t had information, I would’ve been a lot more passionate to the impact that it would’ve had on the psyche of staff. That’s over time I learned that as the decision then kind of essentially led to a lot of blow back.
I would say this goes back to the relationship with my boss. I wasn’t really afforded the opportunity to prepare for the meeting. We sat down and here was a decision I essentially was reading from a piece of paper. So, I wasn’t prepared in the sense. But I’m usually sharp, usually pretty sharp. 30 seconds, I can quickly triangulate and get to some point, but I just wasn’t prepared in that context.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. I know this is hindsight 20/20, is there anything that you feel like you could have done differently in spite of not having the full story, the context that would’ve given you more information to go on regarding the scenarios, as well as being sort of called in an ad hoc way to participate in this meeting? Is there anything that you feel you could have done differently?
ADAM: Yeah, I could have voiced my discomfort around that. Like you said, it’s hindsight. But certainly, I need to at least know that I don’t have all the things that I need to make a decision. And if I can’t make a decision, I can’t be part of the meeting. Therefore, can you give me some more time to maybe sit with this information and then we could reconvene where maybe I am more armed with some information or had more time to deliberate? So, maybe I should have voiced my discomfort at that moment that I am not as prepared for this meeting as the other people because I was just brought in and I really don’t have the context behind how this could impact staff morale.
MURIEL WILKINS: In that moment when you were in the meeting, did you feel that discomfort?
ADAM: I certainly felt it when it came to the moves that were made essentially regarding the employees. I felt that, okay, I don’t understand the full picture. So, there was a discomfort there. I didn’t have the issues around the context. I just operated from premise that, okay, well, this is something that’s either grounded in employee’s performance or it’s grounded in really some metric that we’re using. I really didn’t have the context behind it. I was struggling to understand some of the moves that were being made. So, there was certainly some element of discomfort there.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I know we’re speaking in hindsight, but Adam, this won’t be the last time you feel discomfort and a struggle. So, we’re going to extrapolate from this more to inform in the future, okay?
ADAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you felt some discomfort, you were struggling a little, you started to be like, “What is happening?” And you had said, “I’m pretty quick. I’m usually able to put two and two together quick.” Wasn’t quite happening. And so, how did you respond to that discomfort that you were feeling?
ADAM: I didn’t, and I just went along with ultimately what was being posed. I kind of suppressed it, I suppose. I chose to go along with the group as opposed to really embrace that discomfort that I was having, which most cases it’s usually signaling something that I should pay attention to.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how did that serve you to go along with the group?
ADAM: It did not serve.
MURIEL WILKINS: But there must be a reason you went along with the group. Why? What was your reason for going along with the group?
ADAM: Sure, yeah. It served me in the sense that, again, I’m building this relationship with this boss who we had a distant relationship. It did serve me in the sense that it caused me not to have friction, further friction with my boss.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how did it not serve you?
ADAM: One, it impacted a lot of my employees. And then I think from my standpoint personally, it didn’t sit well with me because, again, it wasn’t the thing that has guided me through my career so far, relationship-based, thinking things through multiple kind of different scenarios. It was kind of against everything that has worked for me so far. So, there was a real impact in terms of the impact, my staff, my employees. But then also personally, there was a sense that I kind of betrayed the things that have worked pretty well for me in terms of my career.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I just want to pull back for a sec. Because I’m seeing sort of three things visually. There’s the outcome, which is how the people are impacted. Which again, as we sit, we don’t know which direction that would’ve gone in one way or the other. Then there’s your boss and there’s been friction there, and you didn’t want to exacerbate the friction. You wanted to kind of serve that relationship. And then there’s the relationship with yourself, which is what you believe, your voice, your values, your conviction. And I think in the moment what happened or what it sounds like is happening, you tell me, is in order to keep the relationship intact, you took your voice out of the picture.
ADAM: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You used the word betrayed. You betrayed your own values and your own voice in order to, “seemingly”, I’m using quotation fingers, make the other person okay.
ADAM: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s a dissonance that happens there. So, my question for you is what would it have looked like for you to have your voice in the room and maintain the relationship with your boss, not exacerbate the relationship with your boss? Because it’s already a little tense, so not exacerbate it. You said you like scenarios, so this is a scenario. What would that scenario have looked like?
ADAM: Yeah, so it would’ve looked I think like me presenting, again, presenting the way that I process information or make decisions. Essentially maybe asking him maybe before we quickly jump to make a decision on this, let me understand a couple of things so that I have a better understanding and that I can probably put forward my views on it. And then I would’ve presented some of the scenarios and really asked his views, well, how would you handle this, how would you handle that situation. And then voice my views, but then also say, look, ultimately decision sits with you. But ultimately these are my views and it’s not meant to be personal in any way, this is what I think.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if you had shown up in that way and the outcome had still been the same, meaning whatever the people impact was, it still happened, but you had shown up in that way, would we be having this conversation today?
ADAM: I don’t think so. I think I would probably be a lot more settled in myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because?
ADAM: Well, because I would’ve articulated and I would’ve not betrayed my process, and I would’ve at least given him support to be able to make a decision without him feeling that I’m trying to undermine him.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, okay. So, you would’ve been holding both agendas versus abandoning yours for the sake of the other or for the sake of the organization. You could replace boss with any number of things, the organization, your team, your peers, your spouse. You’re laughing. I hit a nerve there, huh.
Okay, so let’s talk about that. Is this the first time that you have felt like you have had to betray, again, using your word, sort of subdue your own voice or kind of abandon your way or your voice or your agenda in order to not exacerbate or maintain the relationship?
ADAM: No, it’s certainly happened before. Like you said, there’s so many different dynamics there. You do it all the time in … Happily married, I have beautiful kids. There are many times I want to go hiking on a mountain and watch the stars, the moon, but you have to end up in an all-inclusive resort, eating processed food.
MURIEL WILKINS: Not processed food.
ADAM: So, I suppose as a sacrifice, it’s happened a number of times. It’s happened in personal life, it’s happened in work. There are many situations previously in work where you kind of have to go along with ultimately the decision of the team and kind of put your views to the side just to maintain team harmony. But none of it ever felt essentially so impactful. None of those decisions ever felt like they had such a knock-on effect on people’s lives.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, the level to which you’re willing to, again, using your term sacrifice may be related to what’s at stake. Maybe the sacrifice doesn’t sting as much when what’s at stake doesn’t hit a core value of yours. In this case, you mentioned that at the core of leadership, we’re going back to the beginning of our conversation, you said in the core of leadership, for you it’s all about relationship and people and bringing out the best in people. And so, when you’re in situations where what’s at stake is the very thing that you see at the core and center of your leadership, how much are you willing to give up for the sake of the relationship is the question. So, when I say that, how does that resonate with you?
ADAM: It certainly resonates. I think you’re absolutely right. There’s certainly severity it felt like to this decision. And the part that I think hits home the most, and maybe that’s why I’m using words like betrayed, abandoned, it just felt like the opposite of what I believe in. Yeah, it certainly feels like when there’s a lot more at stake, especially as it relates to the core of what I believe in as a leader, that I’m maybe not as flexible or maybe I can’t live with myself if I don’t stick to my core values in that situation. And it’s something that has just kind of eaten away at me.
MURIEL WILKINS: All kinds of examples and stories tend to come up in coaching conversations, and they’re important because they can help us work through how we feel about certain interactions and start positioning how we might want to behave differently. But it’s often less about the moment itself and more about what it reflects back to the person I’m coaching. As I point out, it won’t be the last time Adam will feel discomfort in his work. But as he starts to grow into his newest leadership role, it’s important for him to recognize these moments of discomfort and think about different paths he could have taken. Adam’s major challenge here is finding a way to not betray his own voice at a time when he’s worried about ruffling feathers with key stakeholders. It’s about being able to hold multiple agendas at once, which is an essential skill leaders need to have no matter what company they work at or what boss they have. After having Adam talk through the specific reasons why he was feeling negatively about this particular outcome, I wanted to circle back to an idea he brought up earlier in the conversation, maturity.
Adam, you started off by saying is it a question of maturity. Actually, what you’re demonstrating is maturity, which is that you know yourself well enough and know what you stand for, that when you don’t stand behind it, you can’t just be blasé about it. Because it matters. That is a level of maturity. I think where you are is am I willing to take the actions required to stand and protect and do all the things according to my values or to what I believe. And that as a leader, the greater you are in scope, the more the responsibility, the more of those types of decisions will come up. And yeah, that’s the reality of it. Then there’s never a perfect answer.
So, that is when we look at leadership competencies, the competencies or the competencies of standing alone, courage, being able to act with integrity. So, it’s not surprising that you’re feeling what you’re feeling. I think now it’s, okay, so when you do feel those things, because when I asked you did you feel uncomfortable, and you were like, “Yeah.” Right? What do you do with it? Do you ignore it? Do you sit with it, say I’m not going to do one thing or the other? Or do you act on it? Those are all choices.
ADAM: And maybe to help me process that a little bit more, these decisions, they sometimes they’re slash of a pen, you have to make a call. And when you get that discomfort, sometimes it takes a little bit more time to think through at the core of it. So, is it muscle memory? Does this then serve as my guide moving forward that I’m always going to refer to whenever I have one of these issues that will allow me to then kind of take myself out of that situation, think about it, and make sure that I speak up? Or is it just a flip of a coin and you kind of have to decide in that moment?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I think it’s probably someplace in the middle in that when you had the discomfort, it wasn’t telling you. Okay, I’m going to give you an example that happens a little too often in our house. It’s like when the smoke alarm goes off in our house, we don’t automatically run out of the house because the house is on fire. Smoke alarm’s going off, we’re on a, no. We’re like, “The smoke alarm is going off. Let’s assess the situation and what choices do we have right now.” Do we stay? Do we try to get the smoke down? Do we call the fire department? Do we leave the house?
The smoke is analogous to your level of discomfort. You are getting the smoke signals. So, there is no rule book of you get the smoke signals, this is what you do. It’s you get the smoke signals and then you assess the situation and what choices are at your disposal. And most times in our house when the smoke alarm goes off, it’s because somebody’s cooking, usually me, and didn’t turn on the vent. Or somebody’s taking a shower and opened the door and didn’t turn on the air circulation in the bathroom, the smoke comes billowing out of the bathroom. That’s the kids.
But you get what I’m saying. So, if you’re feeling that feeling of discomfort, which you say you can recognize. Some people can’t even recognize that, so let’s just start there. But you say you recognize it, you feel it.
ADAM: Yeah, absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: If that is the smoke alarm, what choices do you then have?
ADAM: Assess the situation, like you said. Think through the options that I have. I think at the core of it, make sure that I articulate my inner voice, maybe not let the process rush me too quickly. And ultimately, sometimes you have to make decisions, but I think make sure that you articulate your inner voice and really forget about, not forget about the outcome, but realize that you can’t control the outcome.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, you don’t forget about the outcome. You just say what is the outcome, number one. Because to be honest, even though you said in the situation that we’ve been using to illustrate all this, even though you said the outcome was to influence for the people impact, the way that you acted was more aligned with the outcome of preserving the relationship with your boss. That actually is what drove your action.
So, I think a big piece of this is also do you have clarity around what the outcome is that you’re looking to drive and being really honest with yourself around that. Because sometimes the outcome is I want to preserve a relationship or I want to make whatever this group of people happy, the other uber outcome, not that important, et cetera, so I’m going to put that as the number one priority. It’s like competing priorities, and that’s what was happening here. But the way you acted was more aligned with the priority of the relationship between you and your boss. Was that intentional?
ADAM: No, certainly not. I don’t think that, and again, I want to be clear to my prior self as well, but I don’t think I was.
MURIEL WILKINS: And we’re often not. And that’s where you said you weren’t prepared, I think some of these things don’t happen just in the room. It’s not like you came in the room and all of a sudden said, “Oh my gosh, I want to preserve the relationship with my boss.” There had been things accumulating. And so, one of the things in terms of maturing as a leader is being clear about what the priorities are, knowing that they’re all important. But what supersedes what? So, that when the moment comes, you can make decisions based on those priorities. Okay?
ADAM: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, number one, smoke signal goes off, assess the situation. What outcome am I driving to here? What is the priority? Which is aligned with what’s at stake. Just because you’re saying something is super important, which is what you said, the people impact is super important, core value of mine, does not mean that you are automatically going to make it the priority. And that’s where the misalignment was here. How many times do people say, I’m really talking about myself here, “My health is so important to me.” And then when I prioritize my meal, I’m prioritizing the chocolate chip cookie over the carrots.
ADAM: Yes, totally get it.
MURIEL WILKINS: You get it. So, the assessment, what’s important, what’s at stake, is that what I’m prioritizing today? And sometimes you don’t prioritize it. Sometimes you prioritize something else, and that’s okay. Just be clear about what it is that you’re prioritizing, and then your actions should be aligned with the priority. So, there was misalignment here. So, going back to your question around, okay, so what do I do in those situations? Did they happen quickly and is it muscle memory? I think what you do is you take it from this being a very unconscious, magical things are just going to happen in an ideal way, to how do I approach every situation, particularly ones where something is of high stakes in a much more conscious, strategic, mindful way.
ADAM: Yes, I am definitely taking away the words strategic and mindful. Because certainly the aspect around the prioritization of oftentimes a lot of competing initiatives, things that are going to be impacted, it is the constant decisions that we have to face every single day as leaders. And I think as long as I am conscious about what I’m placing before, I think I can sleep well at night. But suppose maybe in this sense that I felt one should have been placed before the other, and I was living in a sense of discomfort there. So, I get that framework and it’s certainly one that I think probably will help me improve as a leader.
MURIEL WILKINS: What aspect do you think will be the improvement?
ADAM: I think for me, certainly to be able to kind of quickly realize in some of those situations, essentially that inner alarm that you’re referring to, how do I assess the situation in that scenarios and to quickly realize that, okay, there’s some kind of decision here that’s happening internally, and don’t shut down as a leader because you have some level of discomfort. But also don’t immediately switch the other side, figure out what of these two, what is the most important priority. And then I think it just allows me to then move on and continuing to develop myself without having this kind of inner conflict around whether or not I betrayed my core values in a way or anything like that. It just will allow me to kind of grow.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And so, I know that we lasered in on this one particular situation, but I think this particular situation, and the reason that you even brought it up is because part of leading is that you are going to have external conflict, conflict with the other, and you’re also going to have inner conflict where you are debating within yourself what direction to go in. Most people focus on the external conflict, I’ll be honest with you. So, it is a different level of maturity to be able to get to a place where, okay, I’m actually experiencing an inner conflict, which is completely fine. The goal is not to never have inner conflict. You’re going to have inner conflict. If you pay attention for the rest of today about how many times you experience inner conflict, you’ll see. I don’t know, maybe it’s not true, maybe it’s just me, but it’s constant.
ADAM: Every time I look at a menu, it is like inner conflict actually.
MURIEL WILKINS: Every time I decide whether I should go on social media or not, there is an inner conflict. Because there’s not even a decision. The conflict, just social media wins right away. So, it’s a natural tension to have. The more that’s at stake, probably the more you will feel the tension, and it’s okay. And that becomes your signal I probably need to be a little more strategic right now. I probably need to be a little more mindful.
There’s a saying in the leadership world, and I’m forgetting the author, I’ll come back to you with it, but he would talk about you need to go up on the balcony. And as a leader, you go up on the balcony so that you can see what’s happening. And once you can see what’s happening and you get some distance from it, you have a better chance of being able to resolve the situation or get to a resolution versus when you’re actually in it. So, when you get that smoke signal, it’s your signal to say, “Let me assess what’s happening, what’s at stake, and what choices do I have right now.” What’s at stake? What are my priorities? Given that, what choices do I have? What choice am I going to make? Okay?
ADAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if you can’t feel you need more time, then you say, “Hey, this isn’t a decision I can make right now.” That’s part of your choice.
ADAM: All right.
MURIEL WILKINS: But it all depends on what’s at stake and what’s the risk.
ADAM: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so your question coming in was, you tell me.
ADAM: I wanted to know if I was lacking courage or there was something that was missing in terms of my level of maturity. But I think as you’ve explained it, there’s a lot of maturity that’s there. It’s just sometimes it’s just wrestling with some of these issues internally that leads to that sense of discomfort.
MURIEL WILKINS: The lion had the courage all along.
ADAM: He did. He did.
MURIEL WILKINS: He did.
ADAM: He did, yes. So, I think it’s probably after that I picked that because there’s so many sub-meanings to that, but it’s something that just kind of came to mind. As a child, I loved that movie. And I think you’re a lot more profound than the actual wizard, but certainly I think you’re able to really just kind of uncover what the true issue was. It was, I think from my perspective, maybe I was a little too hard on myself, but I’m sure that you’ve given me the clarity to really understand the framework that I need to operate in as a leader, as my career kind of excels, to make better decisions. And not only that, to be able to live with those decisions that I make, which is very helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: Amazing. So, your homework is to watch
The Wiz
and report back to me with what did you observe, okay? I’m going to watch it too. I’m inspired now. I’m going to watch it too. All right, listen, it was a pleasure.
ADAM: Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: The challenge Adam was facing at work was layered. There were ways he didn’t feel like he was showing up as a leader, but he also had conflicting priorities between doing what he needed to do to maintain relationships versus what he saw as doing the right thing for his team. It’s important to remember that when you are not the decision maker in a scenario, no matter how senior the role, all you can do is try to influence. Outcomes are not completely under your control, but you can increase the chances that something will go your way.
By the end of the conversation, Adam had also unearthed the inner conflict he was facing in these interactions with his boss. It was an important step to remember his core values and begin to redefine what good leadership means to him without sacrificing those values. At the end of the day, it seems like Adam found his voice. He reached out a few months after our coaching session to let me know he had been promoted to an even more senior role.
That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time.
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: While I was just getting promoted and I’m starting to work how I’m going to manage the team, people are resigning and I need to maintain them. So, actually I lost half of my team in actually a couple of months, and it was a big struggle for me at that time.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to subscribe to the show and leave a five-star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of Coaching Real Leaders, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins.
Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 2: How Do I Get Results Without Feeling Burned Out?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump, by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Ben to protect his confidentiality. He has a background in a number of industries, and is now in a role where he manages a large manufacturing team.
BEN: It’s demanding. I get up before five in the morning, I put in, on average about 11 hours a day. I’ve got a 45- to 50-minute drive there and back each day. And so, it’s a lot, and I guess that’s one of the reasons that I stepped away from a previous employer.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ben cares deeply about doing right by the organization and the team, but reached out because he’s struggling with whether he can make the impact he wants in his company without working as much as he does.
BEN: Many of the things that I took for granted of having in place at my previous employer, they don’t have. And so, the structure that they have has worked for them for a long time, and I think they’re realizing that these are growing pains, right? We’ve got to get better, and we’ve got to get more standard and we’ve got to get more predictable, but they really don’t have that structure in place. So, that’s one of the challenges is, I know how to do those things. How do I do that without it consuming me, and me finding myself in the place where I’m working 11- or 12-hour days and then coming home and feeling like I need to do another hour or two of email to keep up with the rest of the flow?
MURIEL WILKINS: Ben is trying to find a way to balance having an impact, being a good leader and protecting his own time and getting enough rest. I wanted to know more about what’s driving his overwhelm at work, so that’s where we started. And just a quick note that due to technical difficulties during this coaching session, which we all experience from time to time, I’ll sound a bit different in this conversation than you might be used to. Let’s dive in.
BEN: I had one leader tell me this, and it made a lot of sense. I was like, “Man, I can’t keep up. There’s a constant stream of need.” And he looked at me and he said, “People just want you. They want your time. They want your attention.” I think I’m pretty good leader, and I think I develop people pretty well. And so, when you do that, when you help somebody, when you teach somebody, when you give them the ability to do something they couldn’t do before, it’s natural for them to come back to you. If you have answers, it’s natural for them to come back to you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. So, there’s a supply and demand issue when it comes to you?
BEN: I think so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which makes you very valuable, right?
BEN: Yeah, but it’s draining.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s draining. Well, I mean, I didn’t say it’s not draining. I said it makes you very valuable. Okay, all right. So, what does success look like to you? What would you like to see differently?
BEN: That’s a good question. I think if I could get to the point where I could average 10 hours a day, and I think I will get there. This is a place that doesn’t have a lot of stuff written down. It’s a lot of tribal knowledge, and we do a lot of different things for a lot of different customers. So, you’re not making the same thing every day, over and over and over again. So, my phrase is, :you have to eat the right box of cereal to get the secret decoder ring to learn how to do this thing.” And then you got to eat another box of cereal to get the secret decoder ring to learn how to do this other thing over here. And it might be several months between you seeing those things again. And so, people have told me continually, “Be patient, don’t get frustrated.”
One of the leaders told me a good mark of success is that in six months you should have some inkling of how we run our business, and what you may be able to do to contribute. Now I think I’m beating that, I’m beating that expectation. I’m probably doing more or learning faster than what they thought, but it’s weird for me to walk out onto a manufacturing floor and not know where everything is, or to really have to ask a lot of people where this is, and to not see the flow of material and have those things be intuitive.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I’m going to come back to this, but I want to go back to this question of, how are you defining success? So, one of them is if you could average 10 hours a day instead of the 11 that you’re averaging now?
BEN: If I could average 10 hours a day and get home and still have something left in the tank so that I wasn’t exhausted when I got home and didn’t feel the need to go and check this email, or answer that, or do this to prep for the next day’s meeting. I think some of that will come with time. I realize I’m probably pretty low on the learning curve right now, but I’m also very cognizant of getting sucked into the vortex of things that keep you there 11 hours a day or 12 hours a day.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, so I’m going to try to raise your expectations a little bit, but we’re going to start with just chopping off one hour, and I think we might be able to do that. And then feeling this feeling of not feeling as exhausted as you do, or feeling like you have to be on when you get home. So, part of what you’re attributing, and correct me if I’m wrong, but what I’m hearing you say is part of what you’re attributing to how you’re feeling in this new role is because of the learning curve. Okay, you’re only a couple of months in, and so in your former role where you had more tenure, did you feel differently in terms of the amount of work that you were putting in?
BEN: I think I did feel a little differently. Boy, how do I? Ask that question for me one more time, and let me listen and make sure I got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m just trying to compare the situation you’re in now where you have a learning curve, a steeper learning curve, you have some things, you’re getting traction because you’re new to the company, versus situations where the learning curve wasn’t there, you already knew the place. Did you feel like less drained then, and less exhausted than you do now?
BEN: I’m going to answer that a little bit differently. I felt a lot more productive. I knew answers to questions. I knew who to delegate things to. I knew enough to delegate them, and to be able to know if they were on track. I hate dumping things. I like to understand them enough so that I can explain what the expectation is to whoever I’m delegating it to. Those are the pieces that really, it’s hard for me to delegate right now because I don’t understand. So, everything is new and everything is learning. In the past, I could make decisions very quickly. I could analyze things very quickly. I could come to a conclusion very quickly. Today, it takes me a lot longer to do that, so I feel more drained. I feel less accomplished, because I feel like it takes me a lot more energy to get not as much done.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so let me just check myself and make sure that I’m hearing you. When you feel like you are not able to “be productive” by making decisions, knowing what needs to be done, delegating, it saps energy from you, and therefore makes you feel even though you might be putting in the same amount of hours, makes you feel more drained.
BEN: I’m going to add one thing to that. It causes me to put in more hours to overcome that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, got you. So, let me ask you a question. What is your definition of productivity?
BEN: Getting things done.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what are you getting done right now?
BEN: I’m learning. I think I am establishing a good foundation. I am establishing good relationships. Those are probably the top things that come to mind.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, why does that not… I’m trying to understand why that doesn’t fit in your definition of getting things done. Let’s just pull back for, you told me you had kids, I believe, I don’t know how old they are, but I’m presuming at some point or another they went to school?
BEN: They did. Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there was many a time where you set them off at a certain time, and then they came back after three o’clock. What were they doing during that time for all those years?
BEN: They were learning.
MURIEL WILKINS: Were they getting anything done, or were those all very unproductive years?
BEN: They were productive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
BEN: But all right, so I do know one of the problems that I have, I am generally patient with other people. I’m not patient with myself. I know one big thing that I still have not overcome. Very early in my childhood, my mom looked at me and said, “Look, it’s not right, but it’s the way it is. You’re Black and people are often going to judge you on the color of your skin before you get the opportunity to show them what you’re capable of. So, in many cases, in order for you to be considered equal, you’re going to have to be two steps ahead.” That is so ingrained in me, it’s not even funny. So, I don’t feel good unless I feel like I’m two steps ahead.
Perfect example: we had a meeting last week with people that report directly to me and some people that report directly to my boss. It’s a new meeting. We just started it. I probably spent, I’m going to guess a solid four hours looking at data, and having conversations and prepping and being ready, because I hate leading a meeting that I don’t feel like I’m ahead of the people. I got to be in front of them to lead them. Ironically, I checked with my boss right beforehand. I said, “Hey, here’s what I’m thinking.” And I ran through a couple of things.
At the end of the meeting, he sent me an email and he said, “This was probably one of the best efficiency meetings we’ve ever had.” So, I consider it a success and I go through that a lot. But man, the time that I put in to do that, it’s like… Okay, yeah, I know I can move the needle. I can chalk up some wins, I can help people grow. I can get some things done. But at the end of the day and at the end of the month, and at the end of the quarter, and at the end of the year, there’s got to be something left.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. Right. Because there is such a thing as the law of diminishing returns. And look, I will never speak against what one’s mama has said, I just won’t – not mine or not anybody else’s. And I understand. I don’t want to dismiss what she taught you back then, and what you have shared has been ingrained with you, which I’m sure has served you very well.
BEN: That’s the other piece. It has served me very well.
MURIEL WILKINS: In what ways?
BEN: I don’t think I’ve ever had a bad performance review. My goal is to always be the best that has done the job that I’m doing. And I’m not saying that in a braggadocious way. There’s always somebody bigger, faster, stronger, and the generation coming up behind is faster. I look at how my kids do things, they do them so much faster than what I did. But it has led to a really good track record.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I’m almost imagining you, Ben – I don’t know if you’re familiar with the term in sports, “personal best” or “personal record.” By you sort of saying you’ve always got to be two steps ahead, I’m almost imagining that you’re hitting a personal record every day, and then the next day you wake up and you’re like prepping yourself to be it. And so, the stakes just keep getting higher and higher, and higher and higher. And I guess my question to you is, how high is high enough? When does best stop?
BEN: I don’t know how to answer that. I honestly don’t. Part of me wants to say it would stop when I retire, or it would stop when I say I’ve had enough of the rat race and I am going to go. My wife laughs at me sometimes. I say, “I might try to do this for a couple more years,” and then I could see myself working on an assembly line somewhere where I can put my headphones in, and put my widgets together and punch the clock at the end of the day and come home and I don’t have to worry about all of this stuff that I’m worrying about now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Let’s just run with that because I want you to take that scenario and assume that what your operating script has been, which is, “I need to stay two steps ahead in order to be successful.” Let’s assume you keep that as your M.O. and go work that widget. Please share with me how you think you would be doing that job, even though you punch out. Just humor me for a bit. How do you think you would end up doing?
BEN: I’m going to say that on an assembly line, it is very different. I don’t have to develop people, I don’t have to sit in meetings. I don’t have to have all the answers. There’s so much that doesn’t come with a role like that. If my job is to take this screw and put it in this widget and I’m to do that eight hours a day, there’s a part of me that says, “Yeah, I think I could do that because I don’t have to do this.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think your situation would change.
BEN: Oh, absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS: And your activities would change, but your relationship to the activities would not have changed. Which my guess, I don’t know. I would love to see that future because I might be totally off. But my guess would be that you would still be looking to see, how can you run that assembly line, or take your role of the assembly line way better than everybody else is doing.
BEN: I probably would.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
BEN: I probably would.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I think it’s that delta that is causing, it’s what you said earlier when you said, “People are expecting to learn certain things six months, and I’m away ahead of the game.” Well, who’s asking you to put yourself way ahead of the game?
BEN: Me. It’s probably a bad excuse, but it’s in my wiring. It’s an interesting comment.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, I think that just because something is a part of you does not mean it’s all of you. And so, that part of you might have been what’s been running you.
BEN: Oh, it has been.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think right now, you have a choice. You can let it keep running you or you can say, “You know what? I’m exhausted. I feel like I’m burned out. I’ve tried different situations to be in, and I keep running into the same thing where I’m trying to beat my PR every day. I come home drained as a result. I’m thinking maybe when I retire things will change.” But who knows, right? Muriel saying, who knows? I have a feeling the wife is saying, “Okay. Yep. Let’s see.” So, you have a choice. If that’s not working for you, how else can you be thinking about how you approach work?
BEN: I guess the first thing that comes to mind is that if I, and I don’t want to paint the perspective that I am perfect, because I am far from. I think I am, some people would call me slow. I like to call it deliberate. I hate doing things two and three times. I hate having to ask the same question two and three times. But part of me says that if I quit pushing myself the way I’m pushing myself, then I will be settling. My girls would hate to hear this. I would be settling, and I would be like everybody else. The reason that I say it that way is I tell my girls, “I hold you to a higher standard.” And sometimes they look at me and they go, “I just want to be a regular person, dad.”
MURIEL WILKINS: And what does that mean to you?
BEN: Not doing your best, not giving your best. And I can’t not do that. I shouldn’t use absolutes like that. I shouldn’t say I can’t not do that. What I should say is striving for that has helped me achieve the successes that I’ve achieved.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
BEN: So, that formula works for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: It sure has. And striving for that has hoped to achieve that success, by working 11 hours a day and coming home and feeling exhausted.
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: When Ben started the conversation, he was focused on feeling a bit overworked, but also thought that some of the issue was related to the fact that he was still relatively new at his job, that he needed more time to understand everything and learn the way things worked, and that things would get better with time. So, we started with a concrete needle he could move, however small, cutting down on an hour of work of time a day and trying to get that time back for himself. I was also interested to hear the example he brought up of changing course in going back to what he sees as a cut-and-dry individual contributor role.
One where he didn’t have to always go the extra mile. When he said sometimes he wished for a less intense job, I challenged him to really think it through. Sometimes, we think changing our job will solve all of our issues when in reality we carry the same patterns into the new role. Now that we’re getting a little deeper into what really drives Ben, I wanted to return to his stated goal of finding a way to improve the job and his work-life balance a bit, while still decreasing his workload and start working through how that might really happen for him.
When I asked you how would you define success in the future, you said, “Oh, maybe I could work on an average 10 hours a day instead of 11 hours a day, and maybe when I got home I wouldn’t need to be on as much.” Great. No judgment. That is the way you’re now defining best. So, if the script of, “I need to stay two steps ahead of everyone in order to succeed, and that means that I need to work 11 hours a day,” etc. What does the script need to be in order to now achieve what I’m now defining as success? Which is, I work an average of 10 hours a day and I don’t feel as exhausted. And I understand, I understand fully. What I’m sensing is a little bit of reticence to letting go of the mantra that has gotten you to where you are today. I understand.
And in reality, you don’t have to let it go with me. We’re just exploring. I promise you, it’s right there. After we finish this coaching meeting, if you want, you can pick it right back up and we’ll live our merry lives, right?
BEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you will be working 11 hours a day, I promise you that. That’s the only thing I know. So, all I’m asking is, let’s imagine that you don’t pick it back up and that now you’re like, “I’m going to work average 10 hours a day and when I come home, I’m going to have dinner with my wife. I’m not going to check email. I might check it for 20 minutes max every night, and that’s it.” What would you need to tell yourself in order to be able to do that?
BEN: Can I say there are days that I would like to find the person that invented email and I would like to shoot them in their pinky toe? Because in order to do that, one of the things that I need to do is, I need to block time and be unavailable where I sit and stay focused on doing nothing but email for X number of whatever’s a day. And that’s one of the things that makes me feel like I’m losing, is if I end up with more emails in my inbox at the end of the day than I had at the beginning of the day, then I feel like I’ve lost. And that happens daily.
MURIEL WILKINS: And who made that rule up?
BEN: Me. I did.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Ben, let me tell you something. The game that you have set up and the rules, the rules that you’ve implemented, have you set them up in any way that you can win?
BEN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: How?
BEN: I believe that I have. And in my heart of hearts, I believe that if I were to do nothing different, six months from now, it would be hard, but I would be better than I am at it today. I guess the question is, is that really how I want to be living six months from now, right? Six months from now, it might be 10 and a half hours a day and still coming home and doing something. You know what I mean? I don’t know how to put edges around that, but…
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m going to tell you what I think would happen six months from now. I think you would be a little bit more comfortable with it. I think you’d be more comfortable with the fatigue that you feel now.
BEN: That’s a fair point.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like I had a hip injury, and I remember going to the doctor and the doctor basically said, “Stop running.” And I was like, “What?” He was like, “Stop. Just stop running.” I was like, “Okay,” I hurt that bad. So, I stopped running about a month and a half later. All my running friends were like, “Well, how do you feel? How do you feel?” And I’m like, “I feel great.” And they said, “Oh great, you can start running again.” I said, “No, no, no. The reason I feel great is because I stopped running.” So, I start running again, the pain’s going to come back, but I didn’t even how bad I felt until I stopped running. The source of the pain wasn’t there anymore. And so, what I’m saying is you get comfortable. It’s not that the source of the pain goes away, it’s that you get comfortable with it. It becomes normalized.
BEN: One of the things that I always tell my team is it doesn’t get any easier, but you get smarter or better. It’s kind of the same thing, right? You get more comfortable with it. It’s not any easier. You just know how to handle it with more of a smile than a grimace or a frown.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, and I think the question is, is this something that you want to be comfortable with? You came into this conversation saying, “I want to be able to figure out how to do my job without feeling so drained.” And so, is it that you want to change what is the source of you feeling drained? Which, from what we’ve talked about is really this whole notion of you literally trying to beat yourself every day, and being two steps ahead of yourself, of what you were yesterday. Or are you going to say, “Nope, I don’t want to be comfortable with that level of energy draining, and therefore I need to change or not have that be my source.” And the source is the expectations that you have set on yourself.
BEN: How do you do that?
MURIEL WILKINS: How do you do it?
BEN: How do you become comfortable with not striving as hard? How do you become comfortable with not trying to beat your previous personal best? How do you become comfortable with not necessarily achieving the best?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, how do you become comfortable with anything?
BEN: You keep doing it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Practice, but you don’t practice something by looking at it over there. I can’t practice running by just looking at the treadmill. I’ve got to get on there and run. One of my favorite running coaches said, “How do you get faster running? Well, you’ve got to run faster.” You’ve got to practice running faster to get faster.
BEN: Do you do it by getting better, or do you do it by letting go?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, tell me what doing it by letting go looks like? Because I already understand what you mean by getting better. What does “doing it by letting go” mean?
BEN: Part of me says it comes down to not caring as much. And I want to be careful how I say that, because I have one daughter who’s a competitive athlete and she cares. And when she doesn’t do well, tears can be involved, and I want her to care, but I don’t want her to wreck herself in caring. It can’t be the end all, be all. This is not good, because you’re making me eat my words.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m just listening, Ben.
BEN: Right? You got to care, but you can’t care too much. And maybe, how do you find that line in the sand that you dial the right way? I don’t know if I’m saying that the right way.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, when you think about your daughter, what’s the line? When do you know that she’s cared too much? When she?
BEN: When she breaks down and starts to cry.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what does that represent to you?
BEN: I should have been able to do it, but I didn’t.
MURIEL WILKINS: And therefore?
BEN: She’s probably attaching more value to it than she should.
MURIEL WILKINS: Value about what?
BEN: Herself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Bingo. Right. So, do you see the parallel here?
BEN: I’m starting to. I just…
MURIEL WILKINS: If I may, you asked a really profound question, which is… Well, you asked two profound questions. They just keep coming. The first is, how do you do this? Is it about being better, or is it about letting go? And what came up for me is, well, what if, and we don’t have to answer this right now, but what if being better is letting go? Why do they need to be mutually exclusive? And then you ask, “Well, maybe it’s about not caring,” but you want to be careful because really about not caring too much. And when we explored that in the frame of your daughter, you said, “Well, I think too much is when she starts making it about who she is.” It’s a reflection of how attached she is to who she is, and the value that she has as a person, her worth. Her worth. So, let me just offer something to you that there’s a difference between caring for something and being attached to something. You can care for something objectively. You see it, you hold it at arm’s length and you care for it. Attached is you’re attached to it. It is a part of you. There’s a difference between not caring for something and not being attached to something. I think that’s the fine line, and when it comes to your work, is you can care about your work, but the minute the work defines all of your worth is the one thing that you’re pinning your value on, and the only thing you’re pinning your value on, then you’re so attached to it that it’s very hard to change. As you said, the success script that has gotten you to where you are.
BEN: That’s a very slippery slope.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is?
BEN: Oh man, a couple of things coming to mind. One is because sometimes we, let me draw an analogy. I don’t work out enough. I would love to work out three to four times a week. When I do work out, when I force myself to get out early enough and I can get home, I have an app that I use and I know how I am, I can’t come in the house and come upstairs and speak to everybody. I come in the house, I change my clothes in the basement and I work out, and I don’t think about it. I just go do it. So, I just show up. If I show up, I’m going to do what it is that I’m supposed to do and then I’m good. It’s so ingrained that if I’m going to do this, I’m going to do it. Am I making any sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: No, it makes sense. I think what I hear you saying is, what you’re questioning is, if it’s so ingrained, can I even change it?
BEN: Yeah. How do you not be so attached yet still care? I care. I don’t don’t want this to be, there’s a proverb that says, “What does it profit a man to gain the world and lose his soul.” Right? I like this role because one of the things that I said I wanted to do was, I’m not trying to put my mark on the world. I don’t need to see my name in lights. I don’t want headlines. I’m good. Just let me show up, do my piece. I want to help raise up the next generation of leaders. That’s where I really care. I don’t want this to define me. I don’t want this to determine my value. I probably have spent too much time letting my role determine my value, but I don’t know how to make that switch. I don’t know how to un-attach and still care.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, Ben, I wish I could tell you, “Here’s the one, two, three, go do it.” And it’s going to happen overnight.
BEN: But you’re Muriel. You’re supposed to be able to do these magical things.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re human. We’re human. We all get attached. I mean, this is the human condition. We all get attached. We get attached to our kids, we get attached to our houses, we get attached to our cars, we get attached to things. We attach to our thoughts. What you said your mama taught you, you have been attached to it. So much so that you haven’t even been aware how attached you’ve been to it. And so, there’s a process of first becoming aware, “Oh my gosh, yes, I define myself by this work,” or by the car that I drive, or by the friends that I have or by where I went to school, or the type of job that I have. Until you realize, “Oh, well wait, is that all that is me?” I can still care about those things, but do they define my value? It’s a question that only you can answer. And if the answer is yes, great, then keep doing what you’re doing. If you’re like, “No, actually I also define my value by me being able to come home and give myself some rest, I also define my value by me being able to come home and being worthy of getting a workout in. I also define my value by me coming home and having dinner with my wife.” Okay, great. That’s your choice. So, then, what is it going to take for you to start operating in that way? And what it’s not going to take, the only thing I can tell you is what it’s not going to take is you telling yourself that on the work front, you need to be two steps ahead all the time. The two don’t match up. The math is not mathing.
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in the coaching conversation, we’ve accomplished a couple of important things. First of all, Ben talked through more detail about what drives him, why he feels the need to always go the extra mile. We also got more perspective on his goals for the future and motivation, the better situation he envisions for himself down the road. In the course of this discussion, I think Ben is also starting to realize some things he hasn’t necessarily reflected on before in terms of the assumptions he makes and the patterns he sticks to, which is a really important part of coaching.
Becoming aware of how you are currently doing things, why you’re doing them that way, and thinking through what you could be doing differently moving forward, so that it opens up other options. Ben initially set his goals, were around working fewer hours, but we’ve broadened that out for a more well-rounded schedule that he’s hoping for. He also has goals around training the next generation of leaders. In short, he wants a change that’s simple, but not easy. With this new framing, it’s time to start thinking about tangible ways Ben could start flexing his different muscles. How he can, in his words, show up in a way that makes sense at his job, meeting his goals inside the workplace and at home.
Okay, so what would be the difference for you tomorrow, if you went into the workplace and instead of, “I’ve got to be two steps ahead in everything, including my email, I’m going to beat this email today, I got to be two steps ahead.” Instead of letting that be your mantra. What if tomorrow, just tomorrow, and Ben, I know I’m just going to preempt it and say, maybe not even for the full day. What if just for the first three hours of the day tomorrow your mantra was, “I’m going to show up. It’s not about being two steps ahead or two steps behind. I’m going to show up because when I show up, I know that what I have to give is good enough.” What difference do you think that would make in the first three hours of your day tomorrow?
BEN: I’m probably making this more complex than what it needs to be, because the thoughts that popped into my mind were, I won’t have any problems showing up. That won’t be an issue. I think what I have to do is ease up on, and put more value on learning than I do on being able to make decisions that others either aren’t making or aren’t capable of making, and I have to ease up on myself in terms of adding tangible, visible value in that interaction, in that meeting, at that point in time. Does that make sense?
MURIEL WILKINS: It makes a lot of sense. And the word that you’re using a lot of is that you would need to ease up. Okay, and easing up requires you to do what?
BEN: I don’t know that I know how to answer that. Well, maybe I should say it this way. Easing up probably means just stop trying so hard, and just be. One of the things that has been helpful for me. I’ve done it for years. I try to close my office door or go into a conference room once a week and do what I call a mind sweep and a weekly review. So, I get all of the stuff out of my head in terms of making sure I know what projects I’m committed to, and are things moving the way I need them to move? And when I started to do that, at this new company, one of the things that I started writing was, what two or three things were top of mind for me before I started that review? And one of the things that I wrote was, “If I just show up and be Ben, I will add value to what I do.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Can you write that down, Ben?
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And can you read it back to me?
BEN: If I just show up and be Ben, I’ll add value to what I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, what that doesn’t say is, “If I run two steps ahead of BEN.”
BEN: You’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s how I’m going to beat Ben and be better than Ben, and show to everybody else that I’m worthy and I’m supposed to be here. And again, we’re not knocking that because it has helped you tremendously. We’re going to thank your mama for teaching you that. I’m just looking at where you’re today and how it’s playing out for you today. And as much as it’s helped you, it’s not helping you in terms of having the life that you said you want to have, which is to feel less drained, to operate with more ease, and to be able to leave work an hour earlier than you’re leaving now, and come home and not be on your email as long as you’ve been. What you’ve articulated is, if you show up and be you, which is an accumulation of years of experience, you’re not brand spanking new like you were when you got that advice way back then.
BEN: Yeah, that’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re bringing a wealth of knowledge and experience, you’ve been in demand. So, if you bring that, you’re saying, “I think I can do something with that. I think it’ll still move the needle.”
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, your homework is to put that on your whiteboard, that saying, that mantra on your whiteboard.
BEN: You would laugh at some of the things that are on there now, because almost everything that’s on there now is a verb with an expectation. To do this and shorten this, and to improve that, and to get through this faster or to do this better, as opposed to just show up and add value to what you do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, look at that. What if you just showed up and things got better? Sometimes my son cooks, and he’s actually pretty good. He’s real good, but sometimes he gets into, “Let me just add a little bit more to this dish. A little bit.” And I’m like, “Stop. It’s good.” Sometimes you don’t need to add extra spice and extra this, and extra that to make it better. It’s good as is.
BEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And here’s the thing, is that the case for you? I don’t know, but you haven’t tried it.
BEN: I think if I go back to your point about diminishing returns, one of the things that acts negatively in that is, when people don’t recognize the value of the extra things that you did, and then you’re like, “Oh, well, I could have just done X instead the X plus Y, and you would’ve been happy with that.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. And let me ask you this, Ben, who is rewarding you for cleaning out your email box every day?
BEN: Nobody, but I’m not doing that. I know what you mean. I know what you mean.
MURIEL WILKINS: Listen.
BEN: Yeah, but it does make me feel better. It makes me feel more current. I think one of the things that scares me, and I did have a bad experience with this once, a long time ago. There’s so many emails, I’m so worried about missing something that is critical.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. And so, I’m not knocking the email. I’m just going to say, you can’t clear out the inbox of everything in your life, right?
BEN: Yeah, that’s fair. That’s fair.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve got to pick and choose. You can’t get a PR on every single sport. There’s not enough time and there’s not enough energy. So, you’ve got to pick.
BEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are you going to really go full throttle on, and what are the things where it’s like, it’s good enough?
BEN: I think the first that comes to mind is, I need to get out onto our shop floor earlier, so that I’m not feeling guilty if I don’t get out there until 4:30 or five o’clock, because then that means I’m not going to leave until six. I just need to honor my calendar.
MURIEL WILKINS: I love that. Right? You’re going to honor your calendar by showing up when you’re supposed to show up. Again, this really ties back to, “I’m just going to show up as BEN,” look at your calendar. You’re going to show up when you said you’re going to show up. You’re not going to do any extra extra, and you’re not going to do any less. Okay? All right. How are you feeling now versus where we started the discussion?
BEN: Actually, I feel better just with that last statement. If I can honor my calendar, the challenges, how do I find time to catch up on my emails and critical things in the morning? I watch my boss do that. He’s a master at being in meetings and cleaning up on email, but knowing exactly how and when and where to tune in when he’s needed. I think that’ll come in time with me, but I’m not there yet. I am still learning names and numbers, and how we do what we do, so I have to have both ears. He can listen with one.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think right now you ought to focus on the learning, because that is being productive.
BEN: Okay. That’s probably the next thing that I need to do, is to stop minimizing the learning, and not feeling like learning is productive, or feeling like learning is not productive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Not productive. Exactly. I think because you are so focused on your activity and what you’re doing, I would encourage you to look at your calendar and rework your calendar from a place of, how does it reflect the fact that you are still learning, and that the goal is not to clean out your inbox on all of the things? And so, if you need time to be able to catch up, put that in your calendar and honor it. So, it’s not, “If I honor my calendar,” honor your calendar. That’s a decision. You don’t start when you’re ready. You start when you make the decision.
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
BEN: Got it.
MURIEL WILKINS: What are you walking away with, Ben?
BEN: Ease up. Show up. Value learning, and control my calendar a little bit more, if I had to boil it down to those actions.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. Well, why don’t we try with those, right?
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why don’t you try to practice those for a bit and see what happens.
BEN: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you.
BEN: Thank you. I’m going to try to follow the recipe.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then you can add your own stuff in, if you need to.
BEN: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: A lot of leaders struggle with time management. They get to where they are by working hard, long hours, and doing everything they can for everyone around them. Then they struggle with how much work is enough, and what it means for the rest of their life. Trying to put boundaries on your calendar can seem like a simple solution, but it’s harder than it looks without taking a step back to think about what the goal really is, and why you’ve done things a certain way until now. With Ben, we zeroed in on a specific goal. We worked through why that was important to him. We solidified what he feels like his purpose and his job is, and then we got down to the more granular level about how he can take small steps to start moving in the direction he wants. As I said in the episode, you don’t start when you’re ready. You start when you make the decision. And that’s true for all leaders, facing any challenging situation. That’s it for this episode of Coaching Real Leaders. Next time.
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: Where I am is not what’s going to get me to the next level, and I feel like the stars could align again, for me to continue to add value and expand my influence, and grow to the next role. I don’t know that I’m positioning myself well for that opportunity.
MURIEL WILKINS: Want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
? Join our community where I host live discussions to unpack the coaching sessions. Become a member at CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com. You can also find me in my newsletter on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sopha, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations, and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you, and possibly have you on the show next season. Apply at CoachingRealLeaders.com. And of course, if you love the show and learn from it, pay it forward. Share it with your friends, subscribe and leave a review on Apple, Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Deal with Low Performers on My Team?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that, hopefully, they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Moe to protect his confidentiality. He’s based in the Middle East and manages a client-facing team dispersed across multiple locations. His team has doubled in size in the last few years, and it hasn’t always been easy.
MOE: Before being promoted to director, when I was a project manager, I wasn’t really having direct reports. Maybe this was the main challenge when it came being a director, and something related to the challenge is maybe that when I got promoted, it was during the COVID. The turnover was absolutely high. So, while I was just getting promoted and I’m starting to work how I’m going to manage the team, I was just getting a lot of people who are resigning, and I need to maintain them. So, actually, I lost half of my team in actually a couple of months, and it was a big struggle for me at that time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Moe advanced steadily at his company and has performed well. He made the shift to his current director-level role during a tumultuous time, but he’s also running into other challenges that he didn’t expect.
MOE: Usually, if you are having a diversified team from junior to senior employees, your expectation is always that you need to give a hand for the junior team, and you trust the senior ones that they know the job. They know how to do it. You trust their decisions. But when it came to reality, it’s totally the opposite. I’ve seen a lot of incidents happened. And unfortunately, I’m struggling with managing the senior employees in my team.
MURIEL WILKINS: We started the conversation there by looking deeper at how exactly he was struggling with more senior members of his team versus the more junior members, and how the impact of this dynamic was playing out. Let’s dive in.
MOE: It’s a struggle because I feel it’s unfair for my team, because they know each other, and they know how each project within the company, within our region is moving, and is it healthy or not? So, when they hear about escalations that are happening with senior employees versus what they are doing in their projects, and they are achieving their milestones, you are getting the questions from the juniors, “Why you are not promoting me or giving me? I’m doing better.” People, they start to compare, and it’s affecting, I would say, the team spirit. That’s one of the things.
The other thing, I don’t have a successor. And for me, I feel this is a fail, because if I’m not having a successor, I don’t feel that I did my job or I didn’t deliver the message as expected. I’m trying not to be blaming myself, but I’m keeping myself accountable at the end that, at a certain point, I need to make sure that there is someone to manage the team for certain time, or even to release one or two of the junior project managers to be direct reports to one of these seniors, which is, until now, I’m not able to give this green light.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What would make you feel like you can give this green light?
MOE: If I got the trust from them, if I felt that they are accountable, if I felt that they are able to manage their projects as expected without… I wouldn’t say advice. It’s not the normal advice, Muriel. We’re talking here sometimes about basics, that it shouldn’t be going this way. It’s mainly about trust.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. And it sounds like the trust for you would come if you could see that they are performing, delivering their projects as expected.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, I heard you say that your hope would be that these senior-level folks on your team, that they could be accountable to what they need to be doing. So, my question for you is, what role have you been playing in holding them accountable?
MOE: I’m having my one-to-one meeting with all the team. I’m trying to be updated with their project progress. I am asking them about any challenges. I try not to get dragged with the day-to-day interaction, but just as an oversight on the whole project, how is it moving, and any challenges, especially if I know that, for example, they are managing a new country that they are not familiar with the regulations, and they might be looking for some guidance, and I can give such thing.
But again, if they are coming up with a lot of issues without coming with a solution, that’s one of the flags. I would say that they are not being accountable. If they are having issues that wasn’t pre-identified, and it was just flagged when it came with an official escalation, that’s a flag for me that they are not getting accountable. If the rest of the team working with them, they are struggling, and I’m getting some concerns from cross-functional departments about either responsiveness or in the way of communication or the support that they are expecting from a project manager, it’s a flag of accountability.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, when these things happen, let’s just take, they come up with issues, but no solution, or you’re hearing complaints from cross-functional groups about lack of responsiveness. And I hear you when you say it’s a lack of accountability. What I’m curious about is, what is it that you are doing as their manager when these things happen?
MOE: If I’m going to take an example here for such a situation, so one of them was just coming with big experience. He was a director, actually, but he was looking for a job, and he applied for a project manager. I knew that when I was interviewing him, even I had this discussion that, “Wouldn’t you see that it’s going to be a challenge that you are downgrading to level from what you had previously? You had a lot of direct reports.” And he told me at the end, “I’m looking for the new challenges, and I’m open to take the ladder.”
But what happened when he joined and we started working together, he had a lot of concerns. Maybe it’s the company culture, maybe how we are running the business. It looks different from what he has experienced on different companies, his expectation that we should be challenging each other, that this is something healthy for the work. But we don’t have this kind of interactions. And so, he was always coming with some guidance or recommendations, but at certain point, it became that they are not accepting this kind of recommendations.
And at the beginning, I just thought it’s benign and he will just try to move on, because you need to build relations and rapport with the team that you are working with. But unfortunately, these kind of concerns started to raise from different people, and I had to have this discussion at certain point trying to calm him down and to focus on the work itself rather than focusing on the people and what they are doing. “So, let’s just make the job done, and everyone will be happy.”
But it came with a very defensive discussion, I would say. So, it was a struggle for some time. Even if I’ve seen some improvement in this communication internally, still I’m finding struggles with the communication with the external stakeholders.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, Moe, what do you think you need to do?
MOE: I would go for my way of discussion when it comes to negative feedback. So, frankly speaking, I’m not that confrontational person, but I try to deliver the message, and I did it in a way or another, not sure if I need to try different strategy to get different outcome, which I think it’s a must, because I cannot do the same and expect different outcome.
But with his level of seniority, you will feel that he might be bored a little bit, or is feeling… He lost the passion, and he’s looking for the next step. But again, this is putting me in a challenging part, because I cannot give someone who is not delivering, and he is not getting what is expected from a project, and I’m just rewarding him to give him direct reports, because that’s what he’s looking for. It cannot be this way. I feel that I need to put him this year under “needs development” grade, but I feel it’s going to be a very tough discussion to go through with.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
MOE: My big challenge with him when we are having discussion about performance or about issues is the defensive way he’s talking about the accountability that, always, when we’re talking about an issue happened or a gap, that this issue or gap will be just thrown on someone. It’s, “This one, he didn’t review it correctly,” or “This one, didn’t give me the right information.” So, at the end, he’s not going to say, “Okay. I’m accountable for that.” Maybe I didn’t have this experience having direct reports. It’s not that much long time to have a lot of tough discussions.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s take a step back, because I want to kind of make sure that I am reflecting back what I’m hearing. I think on the one hand, you have this, How do I drive accountability with these senior-level folks? Right? And so, what it seems like you’ve tried to do is, when you see something that’s not going right, you provide them with some feedback, albeit it might feel a little difficult to do so. And in one of the examples that you shared, it sounds like, at least with the internal team, there was some difference. There was some change in behavior, but now you’re seeing the behavior pop up again, but somewhere else.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And in those situations, what it means is… I mean, I don’t know. Was your expectation that when you gave him that feedback, that would be it? He would be done? He would make the change, and then it would never happen again?
MOE: It didn’t happen from the first time. It took me one year having these discussions with the different concerns that came from cross-functional department. Maybe it was three, four months ago when we had this discussion, and I started our meeting saying that, “I can see improvement in the way of your communication with the colleagues internally. What do you think about that?” And he told me at that time, “Yeah. I tried to follow the other ways in order to get things easier for us.”
So, I told him at the end, “Let’s take it positively. You try to find other pathways that works at the end,” which it seems right, and he told me, “I agree on that.” So, I tried to deliver, just encourage him that, “You are doing good.” And I felt that it was a good message, that he was able to digest it, and things were moving in a better way. But again, when it came, it was the other way around from the clients, and now they are asking to remove him. So, we are talking here about unpleasant track record, let’s say.
MURIEL WILKINS: Moe is experiencing what a lot of managers, at any level, experience, the need to have some difficult conversations with those he’s managing, and to try to shape behavior towards a path that’s better for the organization overall. The specifics here of why Moe’s employee may or may not be performing is not what’s important, because those specifics, they’ll always change depending on who he’s dealing with. But what we can focus on is whether Moe can use new ways of handling these situations when they arise.
It’s clear that he wants to do a good job here, and is self-reflective in realizing that even at his senior level, he hasn’t had to have many of these difficult feedback conversations in the past. I think it’s important to note that as much as we might want to, it’s not always a given that leaders and managers can help improve someone’s behavior or performance, especially if they’re not coachable.
But what we do have control over is our own behavior and how we approach a situation, both mentally and tactically. Now that we have context on Moe and what he’s specifically struggling with, we can dig into coaching him through this particular staff situation he’s dealing with, and then end up with some higher-level takeaways that he can apply elsewhere.
So, now you have a decision to make. Right? The first is your expectation. You came in saying, “Maybe I’m not having the conversation right with him.” It sounds like you’re having the conversation. The behavior did change, right? There was some improvement. But now, the negative behavior is happening in other areas, and you’re getting some negative feedback on your direct report.
So, what that means is, it’s not completely solved. And if it’s not completely solved, what it’s going to require from you is having more feedback conversations. So, I think that there’s an expectation in your mind that because they are senior, they only need to hear it once or twice, or this shouldn’t even be happening. And when it is happening, you’re giving them the feedback once or twice, and then it should just resolve itself. But that’s not what’s happening in reality. They still have issues.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, then the question becomes, how many issues does there need to be for you to make a decision on whether this is a performance management problem, or is it a skill that this person needs to learn that you’re going to coach them through?
MOE: From what I see, they have the capabilities, but they don’t have the passion. That’s my perception, and I trust my feelings at the end, because I’m dealing with them on daily basis. I know that if he just focusing, giving more time, focusing on the projects, he will be able to deliver, but it’s a matter of being, “I should be in a better place,” or something like that, which is, I cannot just give you what you are looking for without getting what I’m looking for, because… Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s the motivation on their end, the commitment on their end.
MOE: Yeah. Yeah. I’m trying to motivate from my side. I’m trying to keep people motivated. I’m trying not to get them bored, because any job, at certain time, it’s becoming boring. You’re doing the same. So, you need to find something new. And that’s what I’m trying to do, but I have a limit. And the other person, they need to do some effort as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. It’s a two-way street.
MOE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
MOE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: You can’t motivate someone who is not open to be motivated.
MOE: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now, I don’t know these folks that you’re talking to, so I can’t assess whether they are open to be motivated or not. But I am curious whether that is a conversation that you’ve had with them around their level of motivation and commitment and, as you put it, passion for being able to deliver on the competencies that they do have.
MOE: I tried to have this discussion when we were talking mainly about the conflicts that were coming with the internal team. That was my main focus at that time. But I wasn’t talking about motivation, because I wasn’t expecting, frankly speaking, at certain point that I’m going to get back to the same point where I’m getting a client asking to remove him from the project. I was trying to get him busy. People, when they are not busy, they lose motivation, and they spread negative vibes as well, which is something… I don’t want it to be contagious to the other motivated people within the team.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm. Here’s the thing, right? There’s a saying around when you have a team, you have to make sure that… Imagine that your team is on a bus, and the bus is going to a certain destination, which is the goals that you’re trying to achieve. You’ve got to make sure that you have the right people on the bus, and then you have to make sure that they’re sitting in the right seats.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, when you look at your team members, to what extent do you feel like you have the right people on the bus when it comes to the senior-level team members? And if you have the right people on the bus, to what extent do you feel like they’re sitting in the right seats, meaning they should be in the senior seats?
MOE: I agree with you. Maybe, again, if we’re talking about the senior seat here, so it means that I need to give more responsibilities and delegate other authorities that I need to give. But how can I do with the current situation that I’m having now? I cannot move with such a decision. I’m not sure if this is… Maybe it’s a wrong perception that… For example, if I didn’t test him for being a line manager in reality, he has this experience. He’s saying that he has it, but I didn’t see it. So, shall I say, “Okay. Maybe he’s not doing the right thing on project management, but if I give him direct reports, he will be doing great job”?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I think it’s interesting, because you said, “I agree with you, Muriel.” I didn’t make the assessment.
MOE: Yeah. I know, but I mean, I agree about the-
MURIEL WILKINS: I asked the question.
MOE: I agree about the bus itself.
MURIEL WILKINS: The bus itself, but you automatically jumped to your answer, your response, which was, “Yes, I should be able to then delegate more to them and to give them more responsibility,” assumes that they are the right people on the bus.
MOE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I don’t know one way or the other. When it becomes a performance issue, that’s when you start saying, “In order for you to be on this bus, you have to be able to perform at a certain level. And if you’re not performing at a certain level, you might not belong on this bus.” And so, I think you can’t automatically jump there. Right?
The first part is to lay out the expectations, and it sounds like what you’re saying is you’ve laid out the expectations in terms of skill and competency, and they have that, but they’re missing on the commitment and the motivation and the passion and what it is that they are bringing. So, at what point… And again, I don’t have any skin in the game. These are just questions to help you think through it. At what point are you making decisions around whether you have the right senior team or not? Do you feel like you have the right senior team?
MOE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, if you don’t feel like you have the right senior team, what options do you have in front of you?
MOE: They need to shape up. They need to show that they are seniors. I’m trying to work with them on that. But again, maybe the other point here, as we have been talking previously, you said that my expectation that if I’m saying or giving an advice for one or two times, that they should be changing.
So, maybe the question here, if they didn’t change, do I need to be just more aggressive in my feedback? Is this the solution, or getting to another way of giving feedback? Because maybe at certain point, I feel maybe I’m not delivering the message in the right way, because that’s why still they didn’t change this attitude, for example, let’s say. Is this because I need to be more aggressive? So, that’s the only way that they will be listening and considering to change?
MURIEL WILKINS: And what would that mean to be more aggressive? What would that look like?
MOE: Like putting someone on an action plan that, “I’m not going to be easy anymore,” let’s say. “Either I’m getting the results I’m looking for, or that’s it, the end of story.” I’m not that persistent, frankly speaking, and I don’t feel that this is the easiest way. It’s not sweet, but it’s the easiest way, to just, “Okay. I’m having the upper hand here. I will just put on action plan, and that’s it.”
So, maybe I didn’t have this kind of experience before, and that’s why I don’t want to step within this black hole that I don’t know how it would be, what is the consequence for such a decision to be taken. So, I’m trying to be patient. I’m trying to keep the open discussion. But at certain point, maybe I’m not being fair with the team and dealing with them equally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, I understand. I understand. And there’s a couple of things here. Number one is, you said, “Should I take a more aggressive approach?” which is putting them on an action plan with very clear consequences, et cetera. I can’t tell you one way or the other, but that is an option. Right? That is an option for any manager, as is there’s an option of coaching them through it, which is what it seems like you have been doing. And so, I think your question is, Is it maybe because I’m not effective in the way that I’m coaching them, therefore that’s why they’re not changing? And then your other option is to just do nothing and keep things as is, which I know that’s not what you want to do.
MOE: No. Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: None of these options are easy.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is the challenge of being a manager. This is the part that’s not necessarily fun, because they all can be what can feel like difficult conversations. So, one is understanding what your options are, and then the other is, how do you know when you move from one option to another? And I think there’s a couple of things that you have to take into consideration. One is, “Well, if I keep things going at the way that they’re going, at what cost? And am I okay with that?” There’s a trade-off.
So, if what you’re saying is, “Look, I want to continue coaching them. I don’t want take the more aggressive approach of putting them on an action plan. I’m going to continue to work. I’m going to be patient with them. But in the meantime, I know the rest of the team is starting to feel very frustrated by this,” what you’re saying is, “It’s okay for the rest of the team to get frustrated, because it’s worth it for me to work with this person.”
And that’s fine as long as that’s the choice you’re making. But if you’re saying, “Hey, I can’t afford the rest of my team to lose motivation or to get frustrated or to get all these things, because they’re seeing somebody who’s not performing well continue to get rewarded. So, I’m going to now move to the next action with that individual for the sake of my team or for the sake of the results, or for the sake that I need a successor.”
So, Muriel can’t tell you what those different litmus tests are, but you have to sort of figure out, “At what point do I move to one of the other options?” Okay? That’s more something, as a manager, you need to come up with, and then you also have to look at your company. What’s the process? What’s the policy at your company? I’m sure there’s probably some type of HR policy of what warrants moving somebody to a performance improvement plan or an action plan, and every company is a little bit different in that.
MOE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is definitely one area that I would say consult with whoever your HR person is to understand, does this even warrant moving to that? But what I do think is important is for you to recognize, because I feel like what you’re looking for is, “How do I make it a little less uncomfortable?” Right?
MOE: That’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that maybe the discomfort is that you haven’t had this experience before. Yup. It could be that you’ve never had this experience before, and that’s what makes it uncomfortable. It could be that because you’re faced with people who are getting defensive, that’s what makes it uncomfortable. It could be that you prefer to coach people along and believe that people can actually change and improve, and you would rather do that than put them into an action plan. So, it goes against your beliefs, and that’s what makes it uncomfortable. There could be a number of reasons for what makes it uncomfortable. But the fact is, for you, the way you’re experiencing it is uncomfortable, and that’s okay.
MOE: Yeah. It means I’m comfortable that maybe this will push me to take an action, if I’m taking it from a positive way, that I need to find a solution to get comfortable, but I’m not happy being uncomfortable with the situation. Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know if you’ll ever be fully comfortable with it, what you are doing. And earlier, you said, “Look, I trust my feelings around this.” You have to look at the facts, which it seems like you have evidence around where the performance is and what’s happening, and then there’s a certain aspect of, “Okay. What do I believe I need to do to move this forward?” And it can’t just be because you’re frustrated. That’s why I’m saying having some metrics. What does the person need to be able to do? What are the expectations regardless of who’s in that seat? What do they need to be able to do, and how do they need to lead as a senior person to be in that seat? And then you assess.
MOE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m saying, Moe, is I think you have, but I’m going to ask again. Have you laid out what it means to be successful in these senior positions?
MOE: Yes. It’s about achieving the goals, and we do have clear achievements and KPIs that we need to achieve, with certain kind of quality that we need to be working, a specific process. So, it’s clear how to understand that you are achieving and you are doing a great job.
MURIEL WILKINS: And do they understand what the expectations are in terms of how they achieve those KPIs, meaning the behavioral expectations?
MOE: I’m assuming it’s yes. I know it shouldn’t be an assumption. But again, with the kind of discussion that we had, like the concerns that came related to communication with the situation happened with a client that is coming and saying, “I need to remove this person from the project,” they understand that they are not doing well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, again, going back to your choices, one choice is to continue to kind of try to coach him through it. Right? The other choice is to kind of lay out an action plan with very clear goals or changes or progress that he has to demonstrate by a particular time. What would make you feel like you need to move from the coaching option to the action plan option? What would be the difference for you?
MOE: The difference would be the responsiveness to what we are discussing during the coaching. If I’m not getting the results from the coaching, so this means that I need to put an action plan. I’m escalating, I’m moving to the next step. That’s my understanding of moving to an action plan.
MURIEL WILKINS: So far in the conversation, Moe has taken responsibility and really questioned whether he could be doing a better job as a manager in motivating his team, especially with members that seem to be missing the mark, which is a great instinct to have, to ask, “What can I do better when it comes to team members that are not performing up to par, and when it comes to having tough conversations?”
But we reached a moment in this part of the conversation that I thought it was important to highlight that, at a certain point, you also have to look at the trade-offs, because difficult feedback conversations are uncomfortable. Suggesting someone might not be in the right role or that they lack passion for that role is uncomfortable. The hard part for any leader is to make a decision that is best for the team and the company. Otherwise, you’re essentially saying it’s more important to stay comfortable than it is to upset the balance in your organization.
So, while it’s always important to think first about what you can do better to improve a situation, it’s also good to remember the overall purpose you serve in your role, and whether the current team dynamics are letting you and your team fulfill that purpose. Let’s keep that in mind as I circle back with Moe now to talk about his definition of accountability.
And so, all these things are under the umbrella of driving accountability. As a manager of others, holding the team accountable is a big part of your responsibility. And so, what does that mean to you even, the term of holding others accountable? How do you define that for yourself?
MOE: Whatever is happening within my team, I’m responsible, and I want to make sure that we are having this mutual agreement about accountability and the level of understanding of responsibilities toward the project. That’s why when I was saying, “I’m assuming yes,” because when we’re talking about with the team and how they are doing the work, there are some baselines that we all understand, from responsibility, from accountability toward the projects, that this is not negotiable. It doesn’t need to be discussed.
So, when sometimes you’re discussing with a senior person, it’s a question mark, “Why we are discussing this point? You should know it. We shouldn’t come up to this discussion. I should be discussing something totally different. I should give you another responsibility.” That’s the kind of discussion, but not going back four or five steps then. We are starting to talk about basics, “Why you are not responding on time? Why you are not checking the document before you’re sending this?” And we find that it has a lot of mistakes, for example, or something like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so, if the mistakes keep happening or if it sounds like you keep having the lower-level conversations or the conversations that you don’t expect of somebody more senior, and you’ve given them the feedback, that the conversations should be happening at a higher level with them, but we keep going back to these very baseline things, if that keeps happening over and over and over again, and you’ve given them the feedback in your coaching. So, these are two big… You’re telling me you have, right? So, I’m going to assume you have, and it sounds like you have from what you’ve shared. But again, I’m not in the room, but let’s assume.
If you’ve done the feedback and you’ve done the coaching, you’ve communicated to them where you expect them to perform, and yet they still keep performing at a different level that’s not aligned with the seat that they have on the bus, what are your choices at that point? You have three choices. Right? The choice is to keep them in the seat on the bus, and continue to coach them. The second choice is to move their seat on the bus, put them in a different seat that’s more aligned with how they’re performing. And the third choice is, they’re not on the bus.
MOE: Yeah. If you allow me, Muriel, just I want to go back one step, when we were talking about the feedback and when I was giving the example about the basics, just to clarify that this discussion still didn’t happen.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
MOE: The main focus, as I mentioned previously, maybe it was mainly about the communication and the conflict with the cross-functional department, and we were working on that. We saw some improvement. Now, with the new situation, with the new incident happened with this project, and a lot of investigation were going around, and then I figured out a lot of gaps, which, as I was just sharing here, that they are basics, that I wasn’t expecting to find such findings in this situation. So, that’s my point, actually.
And what I was planning that in this touch base, that I’m going to be discussing these new gaps that I found. I feel that he needs to understand that, “You need to change the way of managing the projects and dealing with people.” So, I need to take a decision. That’s what I’m feeling, that it might be even the good step for me if I’m talking here before going to an action plan, but I’m not sure if I should be discussing this during the touch base or shall I keep it for the end-of-the-year discussion only.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You’re not going to like my answer, because I can’t tell you whether to communicate needs improvement now or at the end of the year, because that does become much more of a performance review question.
MOE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It would be irresponsible of me to give you that type of guidance in our coaching irrespective of what the overall HR performance review process is for your particular company. Right?
MOE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, that is something that I definitely think you should discuss internally with whoever your HR people are. Okay? That said, I think your responsibility as a manager is to be clear about what the behavior is that you’re seeing, so what the feedback is, as concretely and specifically as possible. That’s number one. And number two, be very clear about what your expectations are.
And so, even if it’s not saying, “Oh, you’re going to get a needs improvement,” or it’s in the performance review language, to be able to say, “Part of what I’m seeing in terms of your work with XYZ is there’s a lack of responsiveness. You’re taking a week, two weeks falling behind in responding. My expectation is, over the next couple of months, that you improve your responsiveness and that you’re responding within X period of time.” So, that is about clearly stating expectations, which is your responsibility.
MOE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then the third piece is, how are you going to support him in being able to meet those expectations? And that’s where we get into, “Okay. I’m going to meet with him weekly. We’re going to go over what we discussed at this meeting, and I’m going to continue to give him feedback. I’m going to track the progress to see how things are going.”
MOE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, how does that land with you in terms of the question that you had and then what my response is? How is it resonating with you?
MOE: Well, it’s giving me actually confidence more about the discussion, because I like the part that you mentioned talking about the actions and what are my expectation, and that, “I’m here to support you to meet these expectations,” because, as I was talking, again, with the personality of being a little bit defensive, I need to make sure that he understand that I’m not just point finger on him without supporting.
I need to ensure that whatever the message I’m delivering to him, that I’m able to evaluate it, and that we are having this agreement, mutual agreement, that we will be working on that together. It’s not that I’m just going to be the boss who is, “You just do it, and I will assess it.” We will work on that together, and let’s make the improvement. As I mentioned, maybe this is just giving me the confidence to go with this scenario, and I hope to get what I’m looking for.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And Moe, you’ve mentioned a couple of times that what you want is for your direct report to understand what the expectations are, to understand what it is that you’re saying to him in terms of a feedback. What would you need to ensure for you that he does understand? How could you ensure that there is understanding?
MOE: At the end, he’s a smart guy. So, if I’m giving clear message, because here, what I’m talking about is facts, and coming with these facts and putting them on the table, saying, “So here, this is what happened with this situation, how it should be done to overcome such a situation.” So, if we open all these incidents and we had this kind of discussion, that should be setting the expectations for what should be going on for any other tasks.
It’s similarly the same way that he needs to… If we are coming to this discussion and agreeing on the preventative or the mitigation plan not to get such incidents happening again, so we are putting some expectations towards the attitude. But in general, it means that more oversight will be needed, and to have more effective time spent on the projects to cover these gaps that are coming.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And so, what I would suggest is, in presenting the facts, there’s different levels of how another person can respond. Right? They can hear you, but because they hear you and they hear the facts and they see the facts, doesn’t necessarily mean that they are understanding the facts in the way that you would like them to understand it. Right? When we talk about understanding something, it is the interpretation of what you’re presenting.
MOE: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what you want to ensure, what I hear you saying you want to ensure is that he understands the situation in the way that you understand the situation so that then there is a mutual agreement or alignment that happens afterwards around how to move forward. So, yes, you can lay out the facts, but there are things that you can do to also ensure that he is understanding them in the way that you need him to understand it. He’s interpreting it in the way that you need it. And the reason why I’m bringing this up is because you said the person tends to get defensive. Right? So, defensiveness often gets in the way of understanding. It doesn’t necessarily get in the way of hearing.
MOE: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: It gets in the way of understanding. And so, one of the ways is you can check for understanding. After you’ve laid everything out and they’ve responded, say, “Okay. So, what are you taking away from this? How are you interpreting this? What do you think the next steps should be? What are you hearing in terms of what you need to do differently moving forward?” Check for understanding.
MOE: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if what you’re getting back is different than how you think it needs to be interpreted, then you can say, “Oh, I actually think we’re on different pages now.”
MOE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? So, you want to check for understanding before you can then get to alignment. And mutual alignment is in how do you move forward, and that’s the, “How am I going to hold you accountable? What do we agree to or align on to move forward for the goal?” even though he may not agree. Right? What you really want is for him to understand and also be aligned.
MOE: Yup.
MURIEL WILKINS: Does that make sense?
MOE: Yeah. I agree. I’m trying to do my part, and I’m trying do my part to the maximum. It’s not just that I’m throwing issues on the table and saying, “See what you did?” That’s not my intention here. I’m really trying to help, because, again, I need my success story. And if I came up with this discussion with a positive output, it’s success for him that he’s going to be doing great, and it’s success for me because I was able to help him. That’s my scope as well. That’s what I’m looking for.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you’re doing is you’re planting all the seeds to increase the probability of that happening, of it being a success story. But obviously, there’s no guarantee that it’ll be a success story.
MOE: I will do my best.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s all you can do.
MOE: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s all you can do. Okay. So, when you think about the questions that you had when you first came into the conversation and where you are now, what questions have been answered for you, and what do you think you’re going to do differently moving forward in dealing with these situations?
MOE: From the time that I got promoted to director, I was really trying to prove myself that I can take this position. As I mentioned, it was challenging times. So, I read a lot of articles, and I attended many podcasts. I felt that I was inhaling a lot of information, but I’m not able to exhale. I need to meditate and to just regulate my breathing. So, it’s not just I’m going to read. I need to take some out, but I want to make sure that I’m exhaling in the right way.
So, when I was coming here, I had a lot of thoughts about this situation. I was really frustrated. I’m not saying now that I’m relieved. Still, I’m feeling uncomfortable. I still am having my duties. And this kind of discussion that we are agreeing, it’s not going to be easy as we are having now, but at least I’m able to see a map and a plan that I can put the piece that I’m understanding the frustration that might come from the other side, and how I need to digest it and ensure that I’m giving the support.
It’s not that I’m attacking or I’m just finger-pointing. As I mentioned, this is a plan that we are mutually will be working on it. That’s what I need from you, and let me know what you need from my side to be able to get for what we are looking for. So, at the end, I’m giving the good intention. It’s his decision at this stage either to collaborate, or I wouldn’t say get out of the bus, but to sit inside in the right place within the bus at this stage. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Terrific. And yes, you can exhale now. Thank you, Moe.
MOE: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this stage in his career, Moe has realized one of the hardest parts about managing, driving accountability on your team and making sure everyone on the team is performing at the level expected, motivating employees to stay engaged, having the tough conversations, and making the difficult decisions when needed.
Moe’s instinct to think about what he could do differently to manage the staff issues he’s facing is a good one. And a key takeaway here that every leader needs to pick up is knowing the difference between when an issue on your team calls for coaching versus when it calls for a performance management approach. Unless you know that you have different options at your disposal to manage how your team delivers, you’ll continue to feel stuck rather than move forward with a plan, as Moe is now able to do. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I guess I feel quite certain in my mind that it’s time to make a change, and I think where I stall out a bit is, for so long, I’ve kind of gone to the right school and done the right prep, and then taken their next role and the next role and the next role. And most of my career has just positioned me for what I guess is objectively speaking kind of a traditionally big job, like a C-level executive at a public company type role. And now that I find myself kind of at the precipice of that next logical step, I feel pretty uncertain.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to your favorite podcasts and subscribe to the show. And while you’re there, leave a five-star review. And, of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them.
If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join me on coachingrealleaderscommunity.com, where I host exclusive live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. You can also find me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins, and on Instagram, @coachmurielwilkins. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com.
Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 3: How Do I Stay on the Fast Track to the Next Level of Leadership?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real
Leaders, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Rachel to protect her confidentiality. She’s been at her company for a while and has moved quickly up the ladder.
RACHEL: My growth path has been very steep. I started as an individual contributor, moved very quickly into managing a small team, and now I manage a larger team and I manage managers. So, I constantly find myself thrust in these new spaces and I’m playing catch-up in terms of, I move into a role probably before I was a little bit ready, and so I feel like I’m in the role while I’m figuring out what that role is and what you were supposed to do at that level. I tend to feel less like I’m catching up and more comfortable when I have conviction around my priorities and my approach. Every once in a while, I will get to a point where I know where I can add value.
MURIEL WILKINS: While Rachel hasn’t always felt like her footing was steady in new roles, she does feel like there’s been some data to show that she’s done a good job so far. She’s gotten direct team feedback and the aforementioned promotions, including most recently to be a manager of managers. She attributes much of her advancement to her ability to work well with others.
RACHEL: I had done a relatively good job with my smaller team and I had been at the company at that point for a number of years, and so I knew the company and I think I had built a pretty strong network of people internally. And for my type of role that’s important. The relationships is sort of our currency. I don’t have authority over these other functions that I work with. And so, I think because I had done well with my team, I had a history at the company and the relationships. They were willing to give me that chance.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now Rachel wants to make sure she’s positioning herself in the right way to continue to show her value and to adapt with the organization. While she managed to climb the ladder previously, she wants to make sure she’s being strategic going forward. Let’s start the coaching conversation as I ask how the role is going a few years in and where she thinks her pain points might lie.
RACHEL: Part of the problem is I can’t even write a problem statement at this point. I feel very scattered. I feel very reactive to my environment. And the thing I am thinking a lot about is both for where the company is and for myself. It very much feels like as a company what got us from A to B won’t get us to B to C. It very much feels like a transitional scaling growth phase for the company and for myself. What got me where I am is not what’s going to get me to the next level, and I feel like the stars could align again for me to continue to add value and expand my influence and grow to the next role. I don’t know that I’m positioning myself well for that opportunity, and so I’m worried if I’m not a part of that B to C, someone else will come take everyone from B to C and I’ll sort of be relegated to, “You were the A to B person and you did great at A two B and we appreciate you for that, but now these other things are happening.” So, I feel like there’s so much opportunity in front of me and just given what’s going on with the company and the kind of role that I’m in, there’s so much opportunity sort of sitting right in front of me and I could grab it, but it’s hazy and I don’t know how to do that and I don’t know how to take advantage of that or not let it pass me by. And then in the meantime, there’s all these Slacks and emails and meetings that are creating a lot of noise and distraction, and I’m having a really hard time figuring out what is my biggest challenge right now? What should I be focused on? What is that opportunity? How do I take advantage of the opportunity?
MURIEL WILKINS: And just playing it back, just to make sure I understand. You feel like you’ve been able to operate at a certain level, play the sport almost like I’ve been playing, I don’t know, pick a sport.
RACHEL: We can do baseball.
MURIEL WILKINS: Baseball. I know nothing about baseball, but okay. You’ve been playing local baseball and now you’re like, “But I think I can play at the regional level or maybe even at the national level, but not quite clear what that even looks like and I don’t even know what I’m supposed to do to prepare myself to play at that level. And so, I’m concerned that because of that, I’m just going to stay stuck playing in the local town team.” Did I get that right?
RACHEL: Exactly. And it’s not like right now there is an open role on that national team. There’s not a role that I’m trying to move into. There’s no specific role out there. So, it’s not like, Oh, they’re going to be recruiting for the national team next week and I want to be ready. It’s very much, I just want to be ready no matter what. I don’t know when or if that opportunity is going to be there, but I would like to position myself so that if it does and the stars line again, it’s not something that’s just happening to me because of these other circumstances. It’s because I’ve prepared and I’m ready.
MURIEL WILKINS: So going back to sort of the baseball analogy, it’s like, Hey, I don’t know if there’s going to be a spot that opens up on the regional team, but I want to be ready so that if a spot opens up, they can look at me and select me. Yes, understood. I think. And so, why do you want to play at the regional level?
RACHEL: A couple of things. My goal in my head for my career for a while has been I would love to be a COO someday. I don’t even know if I could tell you exactly what a COO does, but just that, How do people work? How efficient are we? So, I would love to get to a very senior level in my career. Right now, I sort of constantly feel like I’m in a learning space, which is what I love. And so, if the company is going from B to C, I really want to be front and center and a part of that. So, I’m seeing it all up close and able to learn what does it look like when this happens and when you’re scaling in this way? Because I want to be able to learn from that and have that experience and be able to take that wherever, if I go somewhere next or just apply it where I am. So, I feel like the kinds of problems either I’m experiencing or the company’s experiencing are the kinds of problems that I like to solve and I’m interested in and I want to know what that’s like. I want to be a part of that transformation.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what’s holding you back from being a part of that transformation?
RACHEL: Just me. It’s honestly just me because I think I’ve gotten a lot of positive signal from our leadership team. Recently, I’ve gotten a lot more exposure working with our executive team, which I never had before. So, I feel like everyone’s kind of leaving the door open for me and they maybe still see some potential and they’re willing to invest in me, but that’s not their job to make sure I get there. But the door’s open and I feel like no one’s telling me I can’t do something or I shouldn’t do something. I think it’s the time where I need to be proactive about what’s needed and can I add value there? So, there’s nothing, hold it, just me figuring out what do I do and how do I do that?
MURIEL WILKINS: And what is getting in the way of you figuring out what do you do?
RACHEL: Partly because there is a lot of noise in my day-to-day. Things feel really urgent and it can be really distracting and it’s hard to carve out the time to sit and focus. I think the other thing that’s keeping me from doing some of this is I’ve been more aware recently that I don’t know that I’m speaking the same language as the senior leaders around me that I’m now interacting a little more with. It’s like there’s this group of senior leaders that have all been playing chess together for a very long time. And there’s politics and there’s biases and there’s their priorities and there’s a lot of things that they’re dealing with that I have no idea about. They’ve all been playing chess together for a very long time and I’m kind of the new person watching on the side and trying to understand those dynamics, but I’m still new in that space and I’m not at the same level as those people. And so, I just feel like I’m speaking a different language sometimes because what I know is probably more tactical than how they’re thinking about things. And I don’t know how to talk about either what’s needed from them or the value that I could bring. Because I see a lot and I feel like there’s a lot happening at the organization and the company and we need to scale and we need to do this and we have all these problems. I feel like I could be a really good bridge with our leaders. They want to understand what’s going on. They don’t always get the real story from people. So, I just don’t know how to figure out where’s the right place to add. Do they even want me to add value there? But I feel like I need to be proactive about something there. So, I don’t know if you can tell. It’s very hard for me to even describe what that’s like and that’s why it just feels like opportunity, but I don’t even… It’s very hard for me to even articulate what that is.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then it makes it easier for, as you put it, the day-to-day noise and distraction to just kind of avoid it.
RACHEL: Exactly. It’s like I don’t know what to do, so I’m not doing anything but great. I have all these things to make me feel important and busy. And then I’m like, “Well, shoot, if I keep doing that, this is going to pass me by whatever this is.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Whatever this is. Exactly. Yes. Whatever this is. And I am just going to be honest with you. I don’t know what this is, because I’m not in your company and part of being proactive is defining what this is and then testing it out. So, let me ask you a quick question. I know you are feeling like you are speaking a different language. Have you gotten any evidence that supports that belief?
RACHEL: A little bit. So, for example, there was one meeting with some of our executive team and I was presenting. And I think I even knew going into that that I don’t think I’m sharing the right information that’s going to enable the decision that needs to happen. But I’m also working with a bunch of other people that have opinions about this and I’m trying to bring the collective voice and the feedback I got after that meeting from one of the executives because I asked for it. He knew how he wanted to see things and what he wanted to see and what I had put together with the team and presented wasn’t giving him what he needed. And we actually were not able to make a decision in that meeting and then things had to be followed up afterwards. So, I have gotten some feedback like that and then in a couple other conversations, just body language and it just feels like what I’m saying isn’t always landing or resonating, but they’re still giving me a shot. It’s like, “I don’t think I quite understand what you’re saying. Let me try to offer something.” And again, no one has told me, “Don’t do this.” No one has stopped talking to me yet. But it’s like, well, how many chances am I going to get to figure this out before they think,
Oh, well actually I don’t think she’s that person who can help us do this.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, first of all, I do want to acknowledge your astuteness in sensing that something is not quite on path because that can come from one of two places. It either comes from internally, you’re kind of feeling like something ain’t right, or externally you get the feedback. And I’m a big believer in triangulation. Well, this isn’t really triangulation, dualation, I guess. I don’t know. And that’s why I asked. I hear you in terms of you feeling like you’re not speaking that language, but have you gotten validation that others feel like you’re not speaking the same language? And it seems like at least you have one or two data points where that might be the case, which means we’re dealing with something that’s maybe real rather than the story that we’re telling ourselves and that’s the first place that we want to start. You’ve stated a couple of times, “I don’t know how to speak their language.” If you knew how to speak their language, so it’s the matter of language, would you know what to say? So, for example, if I go to a different country where I know how to speak the language, I might know what I want to say in a restaurant. I might know that I want to say I would like to order the pizza, but I might not know how to say it.
RACHEL: I see.
MURIEL WILKINS: Versus going into a restaurant and being like, “I have no idea what I want or what I want to say, and I don’t know how to say what I don’t know what…” You get what I’m saying, I’m getting myself all mixed up. So, if we decouple the two, you’ve already checked the box on, “I don’t know how to say it.” And I’m just kicking the tire, do you know what you would want to say in those meetings?
RACHEL: That is a really great distinction and a really great question. And I think the answer is no. I don’t even know what I want to say and I don’t know how to say it in a way that’s going to land with them. What I think about in those situations is I really see it as my role and where I add value when I’m bringing transparency to things and a neutral opinion. And so, I know that I want to do that and whatever I’m reporting to this group that I want to have that lens. So, I have some sense of what I think I need to be, but I don’t know that… It’s not always clear to me, “Oh, this is what I want to go say to them. How do I say it?” I think it’s like, “Well, I think there’s definitely things I need to be surfacing, and there’s definitely things they’re going to want to know about and there’s information they’re going to need. And I don’t know how to say that. So, I think I understand the lens I want to bring to it, but I don’t know what that content would even be.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, it’s very hard to figure out how to share your perspective if you don’t have a perspective. And I think what I hear you saying is, “I have an intention or an approach on the type of perspective I’d like to share,” which is your lens. So, you said, “I want to be able to provide a neutral transparent perspective on this issue.” And then you’ve jumped from that to, “So how do I share that in a way that’s going to resonate with them and land with them and give them a chance to absorb it?” And in between those two things, there has to be, well, what is your perspective? And you used a word earlier in our conversation and you said, “Well, I never really feel like I’ve caught up, but I did get to a point where I felt comfortable.” And the word you used to describe your level of comfort, of being comfortable, you said, “I had conviction.” And so, I’m curious, what is your level of conviction? Forget the language piece, before you even get in these rooms and in these spaces. I’m curious, what is the level of conviction that you have on these perspectives that you’re trying to bring in a neutral and transparent way?
RACHEL: I would say very low. I have very low conviction. There’s a lot of information. There’s also a lot of voices in the room because part of my role as I’m working very cross-functionally, the way our company is structured is very matrixed. And I feel like because I don’t have conviction in my own perspective, I’m also very easily influenced by the people I’m working with. I can’t believe now we’re getting here because this has been another thought bouncing around in my head is I feel like I haven’t built yet a good judgment about when do I have conviction and feel comfortable about my perspective? And then I really push that to the front of the conversation versus when should I be deferring to these people that are maybe more senior than me and seem to have a lot more conviction than me? And so then, now my conviction is just low going into this situation. And so, I kind of default to, Well, let me neutrally present everyone else’s perspective rather than taking that in and then bringing that forward.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, by you presenting it in a neutral way, it’s almost like you’re preempting the possibility of them for lack of a more gracious, elevated word, poo-pooing all over your idea. And what if you went in with conviction around what you think needs to be done? And again, I don’t know exactly what the content is that you’re focused on, but let’s just play it out, because they’re not here. It’s just me. What if you went in with conviction and a perspective on what needs to be done or the data that you’re presenting and a point of view? What’s the worst case that could happen?
RACHEL: The worst case, I think… There’s two things that come to mind. One is that my perspective or what I’m presenting or bringing to the table causes more confusion and chaos, for lack of a better word. I really want to be bringing clarity progress to the table. And I worry, Okay, if I’m wrong or if I’m off base or if I’m not doing this the right way, it’s going to cause more confusion and be a waste of time. And those meetings are really expensive. So, I think that’s part of it is it’s my job to bring clarity to chaos, not create the chaos. And so, I really worry about that. And I think the other thing is a little bit of what we talked about before. I feel like I’m at the 1000-foot view and I’m working with people that have the 10,000-foot view. So, my perspective that I’m going to bring to that group is going to be missing a lot of factors or what matters to them. Because I did test this one time, I was messaging an executive and I said, “Here’s where I think there is confusion. I think we should just focus on A.” And the response was, “Well actually no, we should focus on B.” Which is fine, at least I knew, and then I can go focus on B. So, my gauge of what I think would be the way forward or my perspective was not lining up with that person’s perspective in that one instance. So, I think that’s what I worry about too. Am I going to cause more chaos if I bring my neutral perspective and is my neutral perspective just going to be so off base from how they’re thinking about things that they’re going to be like, “Okay, yes, this is the A to B person. She’s bringing the A to B perspective and we’re seeing things from a whole other level and talking about them in this whole other language that, yeah, she doesn’t get it.”
MURIEL WILKINS: When our coaching meeting kicked off, Rachel initially had trouble articulating the exact problems she was facing. She knew that she had gotten a lot of great opportunities so far in her career, but wanted to make sure she was making the right moves to continue to advance. The first thing I aimed to sort out was whether there was external evidence that she might not be making the right moves or whether she was the only one who thought so. But she actually had some examples of interactions that made her feel like she might not quite be hitting the nail on the head. And those examples centered around communication and interaction with senior leaders. So, that’s where we dug in, trying to get a better sense of both how and what she wanted to communicate better. There, we hit on something interesting. The idea that she was trying to remain neutral with pieces of information, which actually ran contrary to situations where she did feel like she was adding value. Those times when she took a perspective and had conviction behind that point of view. I was curious to explore with Rachel why she felt the need to back away from her perspective when it came to interactions with senior leadership. So, we went there next.
Now, what difference would it have made if that other person had been a peer or somebody more junior than you, than if it had been a senior executive?
RACHEL: That’s a great question. If it had been a peer, I think I probably would have tried to continue the conversation and, “Okay, we have different perspectives. Let’s hash it out a little more because I want to understand why you have a different perspective. I want you to understand why this is my perspective. I shared the perspective, I can say more about why.” So, I think I would be wanting to engage a little further in that conversation and just hash that out. I think if it was someone more junior than me, I think the same thing. I would really want to understand why that is their perspective and maybe I’m missing something or maybe they’re missing something. Maybe in that case I have more information that they don’t have that’s leading them to have that perspective. I think specifically when it’s executives or people that are more senior than me, my response was like, “Okay, great. Thanks. I’ll just go do that.” Rather than taking that any further.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what holds you back from taking it any further with somebody who’s more senior than you?
RACHEL: I don’t think I have a good answer or reason for that. I think maybe it’s scary, maybe I don’t want to waste that person’s time. Probably those. It’s scary to engage in that conversation further because I don’t know that person well enough to really know how that’s going to go or if they’re willing to engage in that. And I think I worry about wasting their time or taking their time.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, if you were… Let’s just go down both those paths because I kind of want to unravel this a little bit. If you were wasting their time, what do you think would happen? How would you know?
RACHEL: They would either not respond to my message. They could maybe just write it off and say, “Hey, I need you to go figure this out somewhere else.” I don’t know. I feel like that’s where I worry. They would be like, “Okay, if this person doesn’t get it, I have so many other things to do than spend my time unraveling this with this person.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, they would shut it down, which would basically leave you where you already are?
RACHEL: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Gotcha. And has that happened, by the way?
RACHEL: No, it has not happened. And I think the other thing that I worry about there is they could shut it down and I’m right back where I am, but does their perception of me or my reputation change as a result of that, I think is the worry. So, I would be back where I am in terms of the information that I have to work with, but then I worry they’re forming their perception of me too so they might…
MURIEL WILKINS: But Rachel, guess what? The perception is forming one way or the other.
RACHEL: You’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS:
The perception does not discriminate. It’s always happening.
RACHEL: You’re right. That’s a good point.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, one case is they could say, “Oh my gosh.” Or you could say, “Oh my God, I’m wasting their time.” And they’re like, “Hey, listen, I only have five more minutes and that’s all I can… Okay, great. I got you. I’m off the phone.” The other part is that, what was the other part that was scary to you? One was that you waste their time and the other part what was scary about?
RACHEL: I think it’s because I don’t know them that well, I haven’t worked with them that extensively, so I don’t really know where that conversation’s going to go. And so, it’s scary. I’m talking to someone who is much more senior than me and I don’t know how they operate, what their beliefs are, what they care about at the moment, I have no information. And so, it’s scary to forge into that territory with things I’m trying to bring clarity on and just not really having a sense of how to bring that forward or what’s going to happen once I do.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, because you don’t know them, if you brought it forward, what could happen?
RACHEL: I think it is just the perception thing. I’m either bringing them something that they don’t care about or is not resonating with them, or maybe it’s even annoying them. I think sometimes that has happened where if I’m bringing something… This happened actually with one executive where I brought something forward because I thought we needed some alignment on something and the response was, “Oo, we’ve already talked about this. We’re already aligned.” So that feels bad to me when that happens. Like, “Oh shoot, okay, I didn’t bring the right thing or I shouldn’t have brought that forward. They’re annoyed now that I did.”
MURIEL WILKINS: How do you know they were annoyed?
RACHEL: I think the tone and afterwards that I talked to someone who I do know and understands that space a little bit better, and they said, “Oh yeah, they hate to hear that they’re not aligned with this other person.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. So, there is a part around being careful of holding back so much from engaging with these folks that you then are not seeking to understand what they care about. Because on the one hand, you’re like, “I don’t want to say anything because I don’t really know what they care about.” And on the other hand, you’re saying, “Well, I don’t want to ask the questions because even though it would help me understand what they care about, I don’t want to ask the question so that I can hear what they care about.” And either way, on either side of those, as I said before, a perception is being… You’re sort of left in the same place, you still don’t know what they care about.
RACHEL: I still don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: I kind of want to go back to when you said, “I don’t have a good judgment yet. I don’t have judgment on when I feel convicted, when I have a strong perspective. And as a result, when I start hearing all these other perspectives, it makes me even more uncertain.” And that’s like a tree. When it’s windy outside, a tree will be as strong as its roots. What is the foundation of that tree? If the roots are weak, the part that we don’t see, which is analogous to your inner conviction on something. The weaker they are, those roots, the more that tree is going to sway every which way.
RACHEL: That’s definitely how I feel right now. It’s like I don’t feel like I’m rooted in anything, and I’m certainly not rooted in anything I have conviction around. And so, I’m really just being very influenced by everyone around me and it’s confusing. And then I can’t make sense of that. I don’t have a perspective. So, then I’m bringing forward something that I , is just then ultimately not helpful for anyone.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if we continue with sort of that visual, I don’t know, maybe it does exist. I’ve never seen it. I’ve never seen a tree that’s so rigid in its roots where the roots are so strong that when the wind blows, it doesn’t move.
RACHEL: Right. That’s exactly how I feel is when am I being flexible and when am I being rooted in my conviction? And I feel like I’m not doing a good job of making the decisions because the times when I had conviction, I said what I thought, “Okay, someone else had a different perspective.” And then when I don’t bring my perspective, things devolve because there’s no perspective brought to the table. So, I feel like I don’t have the right judgment built up about when am I putting my perspective forward with conviction? When am I letting myself blow in the wind and understand what everyone else is doing and maybe bringing some of that to the table.
MURIEL WILKINS: And have you had moments, maybe not in this role, but in the past where you felt that you were able to do both? That you were able to bring a point of view, conviction and be flexible to what else was going on the room and what stakeholders thought and where stakeholders’ agendas were?
RACHEL: I think I’ve definitely had that before. I think it happens when I have an idea of what my North Star is in that situation, and then I can build everything around that. “Well, if this is the North Star and this is my perspective and this is everything else I’m hearing, I can do my job now and bring all of that together and package it up in service of that. Whatever that is, it could be a meeting goal, a company goal, someone on my teams, a conversation with them. So, I feel like I definitely am able to do that when I know what I’m organizing that information around.
MURIEL WILKINS: And how were you able to figure out your North Star in the past when you did have it?
RACHEL: I think in some cases it felt a little more obvious to me or I had information signal to point in that direction. For example, when I first inherited the broader team, I think it was clear something was not working there. And so, when I inherited the team, I knew exactly that’s the thing I need to go do. I just need to go listen to everyone. I need to go acknowledge the things that have been happening. So, I think I had something to anchor to and I knew that that’s what I had to bring to every conversation I was having with the team that needed to be at the forefront in everything I was doing and hearing and saying. Kind of had to be getting everyone comfortable with, “I hear you, I understand. We’re going to make this better and I’m just listening.” And then I got feedback that people really appreciated that. So, I think I’ve had signal from somewhere whether someone’s telling me something or there’s actual information to point to. That was a very obvious one.
MURIEL WILKINS: But you got that validation after you decided this is it. “This is what I’m going to place my bet on and then I’m going to go out and do it because I believe this is what needs to happen.” And then you got positive affirmation that, “Yeah, we’re so glad you did that.” And in this situation you feel like you have not been able to articulate what that North Star is?
RACHEL: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And as a result, what are you expecting back from people?
RACHEL: I don’t know that I am expecting anything back. I think I am expecting myself at this stage to be able to define what that north star is. I should be able to do that, someone at this level should be able to do that. And I feel like I haven’t done it in this context I’ve been in.
MURIEL WILKINS: And have you explored coming up with hypotheses of what that North Star could be and testing it out with others to see if…
RACHEL: I have not, no. I have basically been procrastinating and ignoring it because I don’t know and I don’t know. It’s interesting to think about it as could I come up with hypotheses? Because I think in my head it was like, “There’s got to be the one North Star. It’s there and I just need to figure out what it is or define it myself, and it’s this one thing and it’s right or wrong.” And so, I think it’s helpful now that you’re saying that to think about that as, “Well, I’ve almost even just avoided writing anything down because I’m like, I don’t know what it is. I don’t know what to write down.” But I think thinking about it as hypotheses, what are the various… There could be more than one thing to focus on. And what would even be my initial set of ideas around what that would be? I haven’t even done that step.
MURIEL WILKINS: And understandably so. Sometimes we think if I write it down, it means it’s permanent in the book of life, forever there. If I write it in my… When I was younger, I should say, not when I was small, I had a diary and I would literally… It would just stay empty because I was like, “If I write it down, then it means it’s true and forever there.”
RACHEL: Yes, it feels very permanent. And then I am very much an over thinker and a little bit of a perfectionist. So, if I’m going to write it down, it’s going to be permanent, it’s got to be perfect and it’s got to be the thing. So well, I don’t know yet, so I better not write it down yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: And there’s this beautiful thing called pencils, where we can write any race and then this other beautiful thing called delete on our laptops. And so, there’s a bit of taking it lightly. And I love the fact that you’re thinking about it as a North Star because I don’t know if you’ve ever had that experience, but I have. Where you go out and you look up and, particularly, you’re with other people, which you are too. And you look up and you’re like, “Oh my God, there’s Venus.” And people or you’re like, “Oh, there’s the big Dipper or there’s the Little Dipper.” And people are like, “Where? What?” No, and it takes a while and they’re like, “No, it’s over there. That’s the North Star, or that’s Venus.” You’re like, “No,” and then you debate it and then eventually everybody starts seeing it the same way. And I think that’s kind of what you’re experiencing, except that you’re not pointing out what the North Star is. You’re sort of waiting for it to just magically appear and other people to say, “Oh, we all see it, Rachel, there it is. Go forth.”
RACHEL: 100%. This is a really good analogy for this because I think the other thing I’m doing is because I’m not pointing out where it is, or maybe I can’t even see it, I don’t know. So, I am looking at the people around me, “Okay, this person thinks it’s there, this person thinks it’s there. Okay, well you all… Okay, so I’ll just… Yeah, it’s all those places.”
MURIEL WILKINS: It must be there. It must be somewhere in there.
RACHEL: And I’ll just share what they think because that’s what they’re seeing. And I don’t see it, so I don’t have a way to get everyone aligned. So, I will just share what they all think, which is all very different. And then how can anyone move forward? If I’m just saying, “Well, person A thinks it’s there and person B thinks it’s there and person C thinks it’s there.” Now what do we do? I mean, that’s not helpful.
MURIEL WILKINS: And listen, it’s an and. In no way am I saying or are we saying that, “Hey, whatever you think, Rachel, that’s what it is, and go forth.” Because that would be the rigid tree, right? What we’re saying is I think in the past what’s happened and the inflection point that you are on your leadership path in your career, I think in the past you could create your North Star based on what you heard from others, right? “Oh, that’s what they’re saying. This is how they’re feeling. I can make meaning out of this. That’s going to become my goal and I know what to do to move it forward.” And I think the difference that’s happening a bit of here, which happens to a lot of leaders at this inflection point, the value creation, the value that you bring to the table is not only being able to hear what others have to say, but being able to bring to the table, “Here’s my perspective, here’s my point of view.” And do you take a risk when you do that? Yes, absolutely. But that’s also where the juice is, that’s where the value is. The value is in your Interpretation of what’s happening and being able to say, “I’m going to put a stake in the ground. Here’s what I think the North Star is. Now let’s open it up. What does everybody else think? And let the wind begin. And I’m willing to bend a little bit, I’m willing to bend a lot even, but I’m not going to break.” So, what does that mean in the context in tactical, practical terms? I do believe that step one, before you can start talking about now, how do I language that in a way that resonates? I think you’ve got to come up with these North Stars, and I’m saying North Stars because I think they’re the hypotheticals for now. And you can create a process out of it where you’re not doing it in isolation. “Hey, I’ve been around, I’ve been observing for two years. I know I’m at this level.” You think through things. So, you have been observing the chess game. You haven’t been a bystander, you’re seeing how it’s being played. You must have picked up some things over the past two years around what’s important.
RACHEL: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, based on what I picked up, here’s what I think is important, or here’s what I hear or observe as being important. Here’s what I think is important. Here’s hypothetically what I think these North Stars can be and why they’re important to me at the level where I sit and also why they’re important to these folks at the level where they sit. And then let me go pick a few senior level people, one on one. “Hey, I’m really trying to articulate the goal here. Here are a couple of options. Here’s what I think it could be. But I want to get your reaction. This isn’t baked. I want to get your reaction.” So, A, tell me if you’ve done that already and B, if not, how it sounds to you.
RACHEL: I have not done that. And it sounds amazing because even as you’re talking through it, there’s three hypotheses in my head, and I think before I didn’t know how to categorize them. So, it was just a lot of thoughts bouncing around in my head. I didn’t know which one was right. So, I’m not writing it down, I’m not committing to it, but thinking about them like hypotheses. I’m like, “Great, there’s probably three or four, at least. I know what they are, they’re bouncing around in my head.” I just didn’t know those were hypotheses I needed to go test. So, I haven’t done that. And I think the thing that stood out to me about what you said when I am having those conversations, which I have not pressure tested my hypotheses that I did not have before. So, the thing that stood out to me when you said that was, “Here’s options. Here’s what I think. What do you think?” Because I think before I was treating that as, “Well, I know I should be bringing my perspective to the table, so I’m going to say it. I think this is the option.” Which then I think puts me in that place of is there perception of me going to change versus if I bring it, “These are options. This is what I think. What do you think?” It’s not, this isn’t baked for me yet. I’m trying to pressure test, engage it. Then that’s a much more open conversation. And then if they don’t agree with my perspective, they’re not viewing that as like, “Wow, this person had a lot of conviction about something that doesn’t align with me. This person has ideas. They’re willing to talk to me about it. I can give my perspective and they can absorb it.” So, I think that last piece of, “What do you think about that this isn’t fully…” I wasn’t doing that. I thought I had to just have my perspective and have conviction and that was the thing I was supposed to be doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that there’s a certain pace to it too. I’m going back to you saying, “I don’t want to waste people’s time and create chaos in the meeting, and I don’t know what these meetings are.” But you do want to be careful of the big reveal at the meetings, meaning you’re waiting for that one shot to say, “And here’s my perspective.” So, there’s a bit of warm up in terms of you’ve been around these senior people enough now. I know some of them are not… You’re not completely known entity to them, but I’m curious around what have you done to identify who are these critical senior stakeholders? Am I spending a bit of time with them outside of these big meetings to understand them and so that I can be in collaboration with them in the way that you just described? So that by the time I get to the big meeting, I’m 80% sure that what I’m sharing has a certain level of alignment?
RACHEL: That’s a great point. And I think I’m not taking advantage of the kinds of conversations you’re saying. Because the couple of times where I asked for feedback about the meeting. That executive was like, “Let’s jump on the phone. I’ll tell you what I thought.” And I think rather than doing that after the meeting, I could have reached out before and just said, “Hey, here’s what I’m seeing. Here’s my perspective of what we should try to be doing. Is that aligned with you? Is that what you’re looking for?” So, I think this is where I feel like they’ve left the door open, they’re willing to so far talk to me about these things in a couple, probably three instances that’s happened, where I’ve actually had their one-on-one time for a number of minutes, but I wasn’t using that time properly or effectively, I guess.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, to what extent have you sat with these stakeholders purely from the perspective of learning what is important to them at that altitude level that they’re at?
RACHEL: Zero. The time that I have spent with them has been about a very specific project and the things happening on that project. Yes, I have spent zero time trying to understand what does it look like to get 10,000 feet, what else is up there? I’m engaging with you at this thing that’s happening here. What else is going on over there at that elevation?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, there’s no way you can even formulate your own perspective that reflects the context that they’re dealing with, the issues they’re facing, the priorities they have, what’s keeping them up at night, the pain points they’re trying to solve. There’s no way you can solve issues at the 30,000-foot level if you stay at the 10,000-foot level. You’ve got to meet people where they are. And so, what does that require? It requires you to actually go where they are, particularly if they’re not coming to where you are.
RACHEL: Yes, that’s very true. And I think I was always approaching those relationships as, “I need to demonstrate value with this thing that I’m working on, this one thing. I need to demonstrate value and make sure everything’s resonating with them.” But you’re right, without the other information or spending any amount of time, I don’t have any reason to believe they wouldn’t give me that time, if I asked. That’s exactly how I feel, like I’m flying in the dark then. I’m going to take some very uninformed guesses about what I think this might be and then it’s not going to resonate.
MURIEL WILKINS: Before we start putting together concrete action steps for Rachel, I think it’s important to point out a couple of things we’ve discovered so far. As we dug deeper into the interactions that she’d had with senior leaders, we unearthed that she often feels like she isn’t saying the right thing or aligning herself in a way that works for them. This is a common issue when someone heads up the leadership ladder because as much as leadership is about knowing how to manage your team and execute on tasks, it’s also about working with the leaders around you and above you more effectively. In our conversation, Rachel realized that she doesn’t always know where her North Star is, and that changing the way she engaged with senior leaders might actually help point her in the right direction. She can only do that by being less hesitant, by learning to speak the leadership language at her organization and by approaching issues more from their vantage point. And one way to learn about that vantage point is by asking questions. Otherwise, as she says, she’ll be flying around in the dark. Let’s get back into the conversation as we start to think about next steps for Rachel. So, I think part of your assignment is coming up with, “Well, who are the key people?” What they perceive and what they think and what they’re doing matters. So, the critical stakeholders, and let’s not even think about it in terms of a tactical deliverable. This is just you getting context, getting a better appreciation for what they are leading at their altitude. So, you’re going to go up to their altitude. I remember I went on a trip where we had to go up in altitude before we could come back down in order to adapt to the environment and not suffer. And so, in preparation it was, “Well, what do I need to know about that altitude?” Let’s say you’re up there with them. What are the two or three questions that you would want to ask that you think would be helpful to you in not only shaping these North Stars, but also so that when it’s time to communicate them and share them, you can do it in a way that resonates with them?
RACHEL: It’s interesting because there’s questions I want to ask because I’m curious, but what you asked is what questions would be helpful to me? So, I think one of the big ones that I would want to ask is actually pretty simple. How do you view my function and my role? What do you hope to get from our function? You’ve got us involved, but I don’t actually know if they see us as you are the executors or you are the strategic thinkers. I would have to figure out maybe how to say that more concisely, but how do they think about my role? I think some of the other ones would be around, I don’t know exactly what questions this would be, but what does the landscape look like for them? What are the things that are top of mind for them in general outside of the context of this particular project? And what are the things top of mind for them in the context of the project? So, I’d kind of want to understand how this fits into everything else they’re worried about or just prioritizing or thinking about. And the questions I’d like to ask that I don’t know if it would be appropriate to ask would sort of be some question around probing on the dynamics and the relationships between those groups. Because part of what I sense and what I’m trying to navigate is how everyone perceives each other and other teams. But it gets a little bit into just the politics of, is there a question I could ask to better understand how they view these other people in teams and what’s their perspective there? Because occasionally if I pressure test, “Well, I think this person either thinks highly or not so highly of this other person.” I kind of want to know that so that I can tailor things that are going to resonate.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I hear four different agenda items for you. One is around expectations. So, what do you expect of our function and my role regardless of who were to sit in that role? What do you expect to get from us? What would you consider success in terms of what you get from us? So that’s one. The second is around priorities. So, what are your priorities? What’s top of mind for you? What’s keeping you up at night? Which might be different than priorities, but hopefully they’re the same thing. I think the third is you didn’t name it in this way, but what’s their delta. What’s the difference that they’re trying to make? How do they define [inaudible 00:54:24] Where do they want to be in six months, 12 months, 18 months? So, it’s more the outcome of those priorities. What are they on the hook for? And that in particular is very important because if you can’t connect what you are doing to what they’re on the hook for, it’s very hard to influence.
RACHEL: That’s a great point. I’d want to think about that also and maybe this is part of those conversations in testing this. I have a hypothesis about what they’re on the hook for. I know enough to make some hypotheses or some guesses about what they’re on the hook for, but I’ve never validated that. So, I don’t know if I’m speaking to what matters to them or I’m speaking to what I’m guessing.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you have a lot of hypothesis validation you need to do. First, you need to put them down on paper, then you need to either go ask or validate. You choose what you want to do. And then I think the fourth element we were kind going down because I just want you to have sort of an agenda going to these meetings is what are the dynamics? And I understand your hesitation around being, do you have a problem with these people? Who are your problem people? We don’t want to do that just yet, but maybe there’s a question around what can you share with me about the dynamics that would help me help you? Is there anything I should be aware of? But a lot of that is going to be the reading between the lines. And as you get to know other people who might have to deal with the same dynamics, just learning from them and being like, “Hey, I’m about to go into these meeting with these two folks, what should I know?”
RACHEL: And I haven’t been seeking that help either. I feel like I’ve just sort of been trying to figure it out myself. So, I do think there’s people I can talk to – “Okay, what do you think the dynamics are?” And again, this is where I will very much the tree analogy in mind. I don’t have to take their view of the dynamics as the rigid thing I have to stick with, but it can inform my own perspective of the dynamic, and then I can actually go validate that with the people directly.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that’s where the discerning… Is that going to send them off or how do I play it? And I couldn’t tell you, I don’t know who these people are. But certainly having that, you said you know who you could ask. You’re new at this, why are you thinking you need to figure it out all on your own?
RACHEL: I think it’s just because things get busy and I’m scattered. So, I just never even took the time to stop and come up with this plan and approach of how to navigate this space. It was just sort of, “I will try random things. I’m sort of paying attention to the responses and the signals, but I’m not really processing or organizing or diagnosing anything.” I just feel like I’ve been putting one step in front of the other and doing stuff, but not in any kind of…
MURIEL WILKINS: And we all get into that. So, you’ve spent some time just throwing stuff against the wall and hoping that a beautiful painting comes up. And now you’re going to step back and say, “But actually what’s the painting I’m actually trying to create? I’ve gotten some inspiration from that, but now I’m going to figure out what’s the painting I’m actually trying to create and what are the conversations I need to have to create that painting and let me go test out if anybody else likes that painting because I want it to sit in the main hall versus in my basement.”
RACHEL: Yes, I do not want to be relegated to the basement. That’s the A to B place that I do not want to be there.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this is all about racing your game and knowing these tweaks that you need to make and that you’re still in learning mode on being able to operate at this different altitude. So, tell me, because I think you were also very tactical like, “I haven’t taken the time.” So, I want to hear what are the one or two takeaways that you have from this conversation that are going to make a difference in terms of how you spend your time in the very near term?
RACHEL: That’s a great question and I know exactly what it is. I think part of why I haven’t taken the time is because I didn’t know what I was taking the time for. So, I have no issue blocking off time on my calendar, but I didn’t know what I was going to do with that time. So, I think now I have much more concrete things. I know now I can clear the time because I know what I’m going to do with it. And I think the two things that stood out the most to me are one, really articulating my hypotheses for my North Star. I feel like I can’t… I’m not going to be able to make progress in the ways I want to and build the conviction that I want and build my perspective if I don’t have those north stars. I need that to kind of anchor around. Right now, I have no anchor. So, I think writing down those hypotheses, having a perspective about it and then validating with others is a big one. The second one is how I am leveraging my time that these executives and senior leaders are giving me and being more purposeful with those interactions. When am I talking to them? What am I talking to them about? I was not really being purposeful with that. I think I was, again, just letting things happen or sharing what I thought in the moment, thinking that might be helpful. So, I think definitely the star analogy is really working for me. Everyone’s pointing at a different part of the sky. I don’t even know where I’m looking. So that I think really is resonating and it’s going to help me just use that to kind of gauge where I am. Going into this next meeting or this next interaction, where is everyone looking? Do I know where I’m looking? And am I having the conversations to work through those things? Like, “Well, are we all pointing to the same thing?” And if not, then at least I know that and that’s what we can talk about. So that all really resonated, and now I can go carve out the time to really think about that, come up with my questions, figure out when the right time to talk to those folks is going to be. And then I’m in a place of being proactive. When are those conversations going to happen? Is there an opportunity where that’s going to come up in the next couple of weeks or not? And then now I feel like I’m getting prepared rather than just letting things happen around me and react to them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Awesome. So, I’m curious, in one word, how did you feel at the beginning of our conversation and how do you feel now?
RACHEL: At the beginning of the conversation, I felt very scattered. I really didn’t even know exactly what I was going to need to talk about. I just knew I needed something, so I felt very scattered. I think after this conversation, I feel like I have… The word that’s coming to mind is clarity. I don’t have everything figured out yet, but at least I know what I need to figure out, and I have some concrete steps I can take to do that. So, I feel like I have clarity on what I need to do next, and before I really just was going to go into another day of meetings.
MURIEL WILKINS: I get it. You know how I feel? I feel like I’m never going to be able to look up at a starry night again without thinking about Rachel. I’m going to be looking for that North Star and wondering, “Did she find hers?”
RACHEL: “Did she find hers?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Which I’m convinced you will, and you are. So, thank you. Thank you so much.
RACHEL: Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we started the coaching session, Rachel wanted to make sure she was leveling up her leadership and demonstrating that to those more senior at her organization, but she wasn’t really sure where to start. So, we began with gathering examples of what was making her feel that way. From there, we were able to think through specific ways she was approaching communication with senior leaders and maybe where some of her gaps were. What had made her successful previously was when she felt she had stronger conviction. But in some of her more recent interactions with senior leaders, she wasn’t so unwavering. A key for Rachel to better understand the leadership perspective at her company was to ask more questions about expectations, priorities, desired outcomes and dynamics. Understanding those things about her senior leaders will help Rachel get herself to that next level. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: This is the part where I’m just trying to navigate it. I’m content in my… I like my role, I love the people. At the same time, there’s that, Is this it? This is all for me? I can feel there’s more. I’m wanting to take that next step, whether it’s within my organization or outside, and I think I just want to be more secure in what that next step should be.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify or wherever you listen, to subscribe to the show and leave a five star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations. And to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at CoachingRealLeaders.com. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: Do I Really Want To Be a C-Suite Leader?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sarah, to protect her confidentiality. She’s been at her current organization for a decade after getting her MBA, and is starting to feel it might be time for a move.
SARAH: I feel quite certain in my mind that it’s time to make a change, and I think where I stall out a bit is for so long I’ve kind of gone to the right school and done the right prep and then taken the next role, and the next role, and the next role. And most of my career has just positioned me for what I guess is objectively speaking, kind of a traditionally big job. A C-level executive at a public company type role. And now that I find myself kind of at the precipice of that next logical step, I feel pretty uncertain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sarah has achieved a lot in her career, but now that she’s close to getting to that next level of leadership, something is holding her back and she’s looking for guidance as to why, and what to do about it.
SARAH: There’s sort of a bit of a component of, or maybe guilt’s not quite the right word, but it feels like very few people do all this prep work to be positioned to the spot that I’m in, to be able to take this next big role and have all this scope and influence and all that. And it almost feels like a compulsion to do what’s next, versus necessarily a natural kind of ambition or desire. And so, I think what ends up happening is I think about it, I feel conflicted, I feel circular, I don’t do anything. A couple months go by, I think about it again, and I just find myself in a bit of a loop and it’s a very unfamiliar feeling for me to be in a place where I feel so conflicted that I just can’t seem to find the way to take the next first step.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sarah’s hoping to get some guidance on what she even should be aiming for, and to think deeper about that question, do I really want to reach the C-suite? But to understand where she is now, I first wanted to get a bit more of a sense of the arc that her career has taken so far.
SARAH: I think that the last almost 10 years at this company have taken shape in three forms. The first was this first chapter of kind of coming to the company to build a business, to transform a business, being inflow, working with a great group of people, feeling almost like the job was more than a job. It was like we were here to do bigger, more important work. But then not everything lasts, and there was a big organizational change, and there were changes made that I didn’t personally agree with a ton of them. And there was a period where all of my champions at the company left sort of in short order, and that kind of started chapter two.
Up until that point, I had been this really high performing all-star, which had to take a step back and re-prove myself, a whole bunch of new leaders, everybody being evaluated and reevaluated. It felt a lot like kind of pushing a boulder up a hill. But the reason I stayed at the time is that the company offered me this role, which in my industry is a very covet-able role, very difficult to get elsewhere. So I made the personal calculus to sort of stick around and kind of made it through that storm.
And now we’re really in chapter three, and the way that I kind of characterize chapter three is it’s a bit of stasis. I think I’ve weathered the storm, I’ve kind of reestablished my reputation, a lot of my strategies have come into fruition, and my learning has really stalled. And I think that even when I look around at the company I’m in now and I think about, what could that next role for me be here? I come up pretty short.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s interesting to me that you even used the word stasis, right? Because I feel like as you outlined what your journey has been over the past 10 years, you were like, okay, the first couple of chapters were lots of learning, lots of growth, lots of activity, purposeful, really sort of working towards something that’s bigger than you. Then there was organizational change, and that kind of feels like the storming period. Right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so you worked through that, and so that was adaptation to the changes. And then now it’s like you’re in stasis mode, which is sort of maintenance mode, right? And that is making you feel like, well, you tell me, how is the stasis piece making you feel?
SARAH: It’s interesting. I feel like nervy, I should be doing more, I should be doing something next. But I have to be honest, I think there’s a part of me also that is enjoying stasis a little bit, perhaps more than I thought that I would. I think there’s sort of two conflicting parts of me. One that is, your career has run its course here, it’s time for the next. You’re getting signals from the marketplace that you could be well positioned to do a next big job.
And then part of me is like, gosh, in some ways my job is so easy, not challenging with the learning, that it feels like any next thing has to have kind of a high bar for me to shift it, even though there’s a big part of me that wants to change and that learning and that acceleration and that ambition. I think also there’s probably a bit of being gun shy coming in. Right? I think some of the challenge of building this really linear, methodical career is it feels like taking next step could be tearing the castle down, even though I never thought that I would look at my career as this sort of thing that can’t have a right turn or a wrinkle, but it feels a bit like that because I’ve just done all the right kind of positioning things. So I think there’s a component of just risk calculus there as well.
MURIEL WILKINS: Gotcha. So as you said, it feels like you’ve done all the right things that have led you to where you are. And is the question, what’s the right next thing to do?
SARAH: Yes. I think the question is, is there an orienting statement or a way to sort of organize these many different worrying parts of my mind that just frees me to be able to take the next step? And I guess I think fundamentally my big question is, is the right next step for me to take that next logical path, which is to take a bigger, more influential, more visible role at a bigger company, where I just increased my scope and influence towards the path of taking the next bigger role and the next bigger role and ultimately becoming a CEO within the industry? Because I think when I look at my background and I know what sort of head hunters do, that’s the path. Right? That’s what I’ve sort of prepared myself to do and I think I’m just wrestling with, is that what I want?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Is that what you want? That’s always the question, right? What is it that you want?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the what is it that you want, the timestamp that you put on that is up to you because it could be what is it that you want now? It could be what is it that you want five years from now? It could be what is it that you want 10 years from now? And we sort of tend to lump all those things in together.
And maybe a place to start is just as the way you outlined your career over the past 10 years, you sort of outlined it in chapters. Maybe it’s to think about, what is it that you want, in terms of chapters, right? What is the next year look like? Then what does the five-year horizon, if you can even determine? I mean, I don’t know what I want five years from now, so, right? And then what do you want 10 years, besides being healthy, that’s the only thing, right? And then 10 years from now. Everyone sort of has a different time horizon they can work with. So we’ll want to kind of take a look at that around, what’s your time horizon appetite and capacity to work with? Okay?
SARAH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: But let’s go back to one of the ways that you frame this is sort of having these conflicting questions, right? Thoughts that go on for you in the way that you’ve been thinking about it, which on the one hand, and correct me if I’m not articulating it in the way that you think about it, but on the one hand it’s, hey, the right next step is for me to continue on this path that I’ve been on. It’s sort of what everybody’s expecting, it’s the calls that I get. It’s the natural sort of linear way of approaching it. So that’s one side. And then the other side that conflicts with it is, but you know what? This is pretty good where I am, I know I might not be learning, but there’s a certain comfort level with it that comes with it.
Okay, so let me ask you this. I want to kind of talk through, what’s the dialogue that you have with yourself around those different options? If we go with the first one, which is, I should take that next step, right? that path to the C-suite that I’ve been positioned for and I’m still positioned for, and I know if I went for it, I could pretty much get it, right? When you say yes to that, what are you saying yes to?
SARAH: Yeah, that’s a good question. I think in some ways it’s fulfilling kind of my potential, I guess is a bit of a narrative I have in my head that is if I don’t sort of completely utilize everything that I possibly could do and achieve the best of my abilities, that I’m somehow selling myself short or that somehow that would be wrong, I think. That right, just because I could, I could so I should, because not everybody can, I guess is where some of that is coming from.
And then I think more tactically speaking, it’s like there are elements of it that do appeal to me when I think about it around the prestige, the scope, the scale, all of these things, the impact that you can have on a bigger stage. And then just knowing a bit like, hey, I’m capable. Again, I could, I could do it so maybe I should do it, or it feels like, well, I got to do it. Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, yeah. So on that side, we’ll name that the I could so I should. I love it. All right, and then when you think about the, this ain’t so bad, the stasis mode, the role that I’m in, the kind of position that I’m in. When you say yes to that, because again, you named it as conflicting. So when I think about conflicting is on the one hand, you’re saying yes to something and then you move to the other and you’re like, well, I’m saying yes to that, which means I say no to the other. So I’m just sort of thinking about the yeses for now. When you say yes to the stasis mode, what are you saying yes to there?
SARAH: I think I’m saying yes to comfort, I guess. I mean, ease in some ways. I guess I’ve never really considered too hard that I would say yes to stasis, even if I have. Maybe part of what I’m saying yes to is my lack of appetite for risk at the moment that I’m in. I think that’s probably what it is, like, gosh, it feels like it would really be turning everything upside down were I not to sort of stick around in my current mode.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it’s almost like, why mess up a good thing?
SARAH: Yeah, I would say so.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so going back to the I could, so I should. And you talked about that in terms of feeling like, well, if I have the potential, I need to go for it. Right?
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like, I don’t know why this is what’s coming up for me, but it’s like what I’m thinking about is those, I’ve never been to one of these but I’ve seen them on TV. Those eating competitions-
SARAH: That is hilarious.
MURIEL WILKINS: … when they put a bunch of hot dogs, and I’ve always wondered, why do people do that?
SARAH: That is so funny.
MURIEL WILKINS: But maybe it’s they think, well, I could, so I should. I don’t know, but maybe they’re not thinking about the other part, which is the risk. I don’t know, but we’ll get there.
SARAH: I feel so sick, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you think about, I could, so I should, and this potential factor, how are you defining potential for yourself?
SARAH: Capacity, I would say. So capacity to sort of succeed and achieve and get the next, next. I think it is sort of rare, and really, I don’t mean this to sound arrogant at all, but I have been thinking about it and it’s like, I do think it is sort of rare to in the industry I’m in and sort of have the intellectual capability, have the leadership capability, have the strategic know-how, have the ability to lead a large team. I do have a lot of the raw materials that you need, and it feels like if I don’t use them to sort of grow myself, then I’m shortchanging myself, I guess. When I think about potential, it’s those sort of factors that I think about. I have the capability to be really successful in this context, so I don’t know, it goes back to the could and the should.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. This feeling of shortchanging yourself, in terms of not living up to the success that you could have. How are you defining success?
SARAH: Yeah, I guess I liken it to sort of, this sounds a little torturous, but it’s like you’re running a race and you’re running just as far as you can before you collapse. I know that probably has all kinds of mental health alarm bells, but in my head, that’s sort of how it is. It’s like, I haven’t collapsed yet. I still have more to go, I still have more to give, I still have more to push. And so when I think of success, it’s sort of just all the outside entrappings. It’s really just title and scale of impact is kind of how I think I get there. Just like, can you really be the ultimate leader of a large scale organization that touches people’s lives?
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, that’s the success that you see in terms of, if I get there, that it is a success?
SARAH: Yes. Check, I would’ve done the full potential option.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then what would happen after that?
SARAH: I haven’t spent one second thinking about that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, okay.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: As we started our coaching session, I noticed that Sarah said something about the choices in front of her, that she was feeling conflicted and circular about where she should go next, what path she should be on. She noted that she’d think about it for a bit, put it on the back burner, then come back to the idea. Sarah also had an organized way of looking at her previous phases with the company, and so I dove into the coaching conversation looking to parse out exactly what kind of narratives she kept coming back to about her future, and how she was defining and outlining some of her terms. When people get stuck, this can be a useful exercise to really organize how they’re defining success, the boundaries of the different options they have in front of them, and even sometimes, what is the story they keep repeating to themselves? Now that she’s had the time to clarify her thought process a bit, it was time to kick up the coaching session a notch and really dig deeper into what motivates her in her career and work, to help start matching her motivations with what her near-term career plan might be. So, where did that definition of success come for you?
SARAH: I mean, I think I come from, I’m a first-generation immigrant family. I think there’s always been a lot of pressure to succeed academically and also feel like there’s a lot of sacrifice made for me to have the opportunities that I did. Gosh, it’s really important that I take those gifts and I use them, fully utilize them. I think growing up, for me, the definitions of success were always sort of these external kind of milestones around here’s who you could be, here’s what you could do. Right? Like ringing this New York Stock Exchange bell, speaking on speaker circuits, all of these sort of outside-in flags of what success looks like. I think now hearing myself say it, it feels like, gosh, a pretty sort of soft-mark understanding of what success means. But when you’re asking me what’s in my head, what do I see when I think of, okay, what would success look like? It is all that kind of stuff.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, and look, we all kind of start with the outside-in definition of success, particularly when we start going to school and all of those things. Right? And I think I’m hearing you clearly and I love your discernment around, this is what I’ve sort of understood to be success, and you framed it as outside-in, and that is a definition of success. It’s not a good or bad or wrong or right, it’s a definition of success, and you framed it as outside-in. So now I’m wondering, I’m curious, and maybe this is a little bit of brainstorming here for you, what would be your inside-out definition of success
SARAH: Yeah, in a career or just in life?
MURIEL WILKINS: However you want to frame it, yeah.
SARAH: Define it, yeah. I think it’s sort of somehow creating that feeling of building bigger than myself and feeling like I have been able to have an impact on an organization where I have taken it in this current sort of a state and grown it and built it to be bigger than it is, and in the course of it, done innovative things and help people grow their careers and had transformative impact on an organization, because I think that is the part of business that does appeal is like, business is changing and it’s dynamic and it can sometimes have a mind and a pace of its own. And being able to shepherd something from what was to what it could become, that’s where I think I really get true satisfaction. And I think when I sometimes think about that next step and where I think that hesitancy is in the next bigger role, it’s a bit of dichotomy between what it means to be more senior and have a bigger scope and bigger scale, can sometimes be at odds with some of pulling and moving the levers of getting things done.
And I could be sort of overgeneralizing it, but I think part of the hesitancy is sort of taking that next senior role and the CEO role is like you become a little bit more of the figurehead, and there’s more, at least at a large organization, which is where I’ve had my career, more incrementality and the pace isn’t quite so fast. And I think part of me is just, if I think about inside out, it’s that touching and building and growing and impacting on a day-to-day basis. That is where I kind of get real satisfaction. But every job I get, every added responsibility I get, every increase in scope, you’re more removed from that type of action. You’re leading in a different way, but truly when I think about success and times I’ve been most proud, it’s been kind of that cultivating and shaping and transforming.
MURIEL WILKINS: So let me reflect on what you just shared. So one is I want to acknowledge that you sort of named it as a conflict, this conflict between what you should do, and we just named two parts. There’s probably a bunch of other gradients in there, and so I’m going to sort of reframe it a little bit around, they are two parts of how you’re thinking about your career that just right now are in dissonance with each other. And so the question is, can you find alignment or an intersection between the two, rather than us seeing them as opposing parts that can never coexist, right? There’s a framing there that I’m going to offer to you around, I think what we’re trying to solve for is where might there be the intersection?
The other thing is when we look at those two parts, in terms of how you define success, that piece of it and the outside-in and the inside-out, what was interesting to me in the way that you share it is, they’re actually not that different from each other. I would say that they’re kind of close cousins. Okay, and let me tell you why. When you talked about the outside-in, you talked about it from the perspective of role and position, and you said it’s a senior role and position that would provide me with scope and impact. You led with role in position, inherent in role and position, it would allow you to have a certain level of impact. Okay, and that’s how you define success from and everything that comes with that. When you defined it from the inside out, your starting point was impact. You talked about flow, right? You talked about being able to do something that’s a bigger purpose, and oh, by the way, maybe the way that I can have that, I don’t know what kind of position would allow me to have that. There’s a certain, I’m not sure if I do one of those senior roles, whether I can have… I can have the level of impact, but I don’t know about the other things it comes with, whether it will remove me from the things that I like. Okay, but the common thread between the two is this notion of impact.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: The other thing is for the outside-in, you talked about fulfilling your potential, and what I heard you say in terms of the inside-out approach is more about fulfilling your purpose. So I’m going to ask us to sort of play around with that a little bit, starting with the last thing I just said, the two P’s. Okay? When you think about fulfilling your potential, how different is that from fulfilling your purpose?
SARAH: That’s a good question. I think purpose in the context of sort of, what am I here to do? Why am I here? Why am I working? Is that how-
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, or even, why am I leading?
SARAH: Why am I leading? Ah, I see. I don’t know that they are super different, I guess. I think what you sort of said about impact and being the common thread is resonating with me. Yeah, I guess perhaps, so when I think about my purpose, it’s sort of what I described, just sort of to grow and transform, and whether that’s a business or the people that I’m working with or touching other people that the industry or that the product or the company is impacting. When I think about my potential, I guess maybe what the worry is, is that I get so distracted by the fulfilling of the potential that my purpose is less consequential maybe, or it has never sort of risen as as important as the potential or the trappings that come with it, but maybe… How different is my purpose for my potential?
MURIEL WILKINS: If at all.
SARAH: Yeah. I think, why do I lead? Is it bad that part of why I lead is because I can, I guess? It goes back to the can, and I should. I think I like to see things grow and transform and I think that’s the work that I do, the consumers that our product touches, and the people that I lead. I think that is truly why I’m here. And when I think about, why don’t I just hang it up and go wander the desert? I think that’s where that is. When I think about my potential, it’s how big of a scale, I guess, can I do all those things in, right? Maybe that’s where the differentiation is, it’s like I could do that with my family, I could do that with my neighbors, I could do that at my kid’s school, I can do that in many different contexts. I think that where the potential comes in is perhaps just the scale of it all and the context in which I do that purpose work. Is that-
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
SARAH: … tracking? Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: No, no, that makes a lot of sense. Right? So let’s backtrack a little bit because you said, “Is it bad that I think I should do it just because I can?” Well, there’s a lot of things you can do. I mean, you could quit and not do anything, right? You could go roam the desert, as you said, right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Does that mean you should?
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know, that’s up to you, right? That’s the piece, it’s up to you. And so, I really think part of this is coming back to this question of, what do I want? Not, what do I think I should do? And when you said, “I like to see growth and transformation,” I feel like unless I didn’t pick up on it earlier, I feel like that’s the first time that I actually heard you make a statement that was about what you want, where you used an I statement. I like, right? Rather than objectively, this is what it should be.
SARAH: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if we were to put aside the linear path, what the expectation is, what seems like the natural thing just because I can, and really focus in on, what do I like? What do I want? If you were to just look at that, what do you think your answer would be?
SARAH: I think that I would probably purely what I like and what I want, I think I would probably quit trying to climb a corporate ladder. I think I would try to find a senior influential or decision maker-y role as I possibly could at a smaller company where I could see impact and manage the pace and still sort of set the vision and do all of those types of things. But I guess what I’m saying is, I think I would sort of stop worrying about the climbing and the linearity and just kind of move to a company in the same industry but that’s a bit smaller where I could have a lot more seniority and just start to play with those levers faster and more quickly, versus sort of taking the step and the next step and then just kind of following the path. And not really so much worry about the ultimate scale I would get to, because it would be enough scale, I guess, for me to feel happy about. And then just do that a bunch of times, I think. Right?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, okay.
SARAH: I think what that would necessitate for me is sort of somehow letting go that part of my psyche that is saying,
Hey, Sarah, there’s not that many people that can do that linear path. Gosh, you’ve worked so hard.
I guess that is this sort of rock inside where it feels like I would have to let it go. And then there’s always sort that worry of, well, maybe it feels like, is it enough to just be able to do what you like versus sort of what you could? And I think that is also weighing on me. I’ve never really felt free enough to do just what I like. I’ve always been thinking about what the next thing is and how to get to the next sort of step. And so maybe there’s some work to be done around kind of the exercise of even feeling like you’re allowed to do what you like, versus what you could and should do.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, according to whom though? Is it enough for who?
SARAH: I guess me?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I can’t answer that for you.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Again, it goes back, maybe there was a reason I was thinking about that eating exercise because I could after two hot dogs be like, enough for me. I’m full, I’m good. And you might say, “No, give me more.” Right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because I have the capacity, I’m still hungry. I’m still, I love this food or I want to win. I want to win the hot dog eating championship. Right?
SARAH: And so Muriel, is there some type of… and I’m sure everyone is different, but you have to eat that one extra hot dog and it makes you sick and then you know you’re at your limit. Right? Or, because I feel like a little bit, I’m looking at all the hot dogs and I’m like, is it five, is it six? Obviously not, but is it seven? What is it? And it’s like, it almost feels like maybe there’s just a part of me that has to eat that additional one, just sort of know where the break point is. But I know that that feels like more reactive and not thoughtful or proactive in managing your career. But to some extent, I feel like it will be hard for me to, and that’s where I get back to kind of that concept of aiming and where I’m aiming. It’s almost like I feels like, how will I get that feedback loop, that here’s where I’m at, here’s where I’m at, here’s where it’s like it’s enough?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So I think one way is exactly what you said, you’re reactive, right? You just say, “Let me give it one more push and see if I collapse.” You used a word, collapse, earlier in our conversation, that’s why I’m coming back to that. And when I collapse, that means I need to stop. That’s certainly one way and it has its consequences. Typically, the way that we see it is in burnout, right?
SARAH: Right, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And burnout has all different ways of looking. Okay? So that’s one way. The other way which is not being reactive, but being more proactive is to say, “Okay, here’s what I think I want.” So testing hypothesis, okay? And that’s when we talked about, well, what does success look like, even if it’s a year from now, two years from now, whatever it might be? That’s what I’m going to go for. And then when I get there, I’ll see how I feel, but that’s going to be my stop, right? So it’s like, I know I talk a lot about or I share a lot about running. When I go out for a run, I don’t just go out and say, Okay, I’m just going to try to run as many miles as I can today until I collapse, and then call somebody to come pick me up or Uber, or I’ll call an Uber to get me home. No, before I start my run, I check my, how do I feel today, or what’s my training program, or what’s the ultimate goal here? Am I going for fun or am I training for a race? Whatever it is. Okay, today I am going to do whatever, seven miles, that’s it. And then maybe I get to seven miles be like, oh, I can eke out another little extra half a mile or a mile, but I’m not going to be like, oh my God, let me just keep going and going and going and going. You could, but I know what the consequence of that will be, right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so I think what you’ve been doing up until now is sort of taking the reactive approach, right? Something is put in front of you. It’s like-
SARAH: Totally.
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh my God, I can get that, I’m going to do it because I can, so I should. And now you’re sort of saying, “I don’t know if that’s the path I want to take.” So, what’s the other alternative, or one other alternative? Is to say, “Okay, what do I think I want to do or what I want it to be like? And let me try it and then make a decision from there.” When I frame it that way, how does it resonate with you?
SARAH: It resonates well, I think part of why it feels so high stakes at the moment is with that particular linear path, if once you get off, it’s hard to get back on. In this is very specific instance, it feels like also up until now there has been optionality. You could do this, you could come back, you could this. But I’m sort of just at this pivot point where if I’m going to go big, it should probably be another big company and a big role and a big whatever. And so to some extent, it feels like it’s probably also the first time in my career where if I take a turn, which I think I could, it’s a door that’s closed and I have to be kind of comfortable with that, I think, if that makes sense. I’m sort of not so naive to know that there’s multiple different careers, multiple different ways to have impact, multiple different things to learn, places to go. It is just this particular kind of path that I’ve been on, were I not to take the next next, I think it’d be hard to get back on. And I think that is sort of also one thing that’s uniquely in this moment that hasn’t been in the past because it’s been like, you could probably come back and do this or that or different company or whatnot. But that’s why I think there’s also some feeling of high staked-ness about it, if that makes sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, no, of course. And I want to acknowledge the risk or the high stakes that you see with this, and I don’t, no way am I going to be naive and say, “Oh, of course not. You can always do whatever.” The reality is, you’re at a level at your career where there are fewer and fewer positions of that level and scope and scale, and you’re realizing, this is the path that’s expected and so if I take a detour or get off the highway, will I ever be able to get back on? And so I think when we reach these inflection points, there’s never going to be a right answer. Right? It’s going to be like, what’s the best choice for me? And the “for me” is very important.
SARAH: For me, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. And the word choice is very important, because in every choice there are trade-offs that you make. There just are, it’s the reality of it. And you seem to understand what the trade-offs are for yourself, even though we haven’t dissected all of them, you’ve brought up quite a few. I think the question really is, what’s the trade-offs that you feel most comfortable with that you could go to sleep at night with and be okay with? Not that they would be perfect, just that you would be okay with, at peace with.
SARAH: Yeah, and so is sort of the idea that if an individual can get kind of better about articulating the choices, the trade-offs, etc, that that can lift some of the overwhelm of just taking action?
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know if it will lift the overwhelm. I can’t, I can’t sit here and say it’ll lift the overwhelm, right?
SARAH: Yeah, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But what it will do is provide you with more clarity around what the choice is that you’re making. Okay? Does the overwhelm ever-
SARAH: Ever change? Yeah, right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, That’s a really interesting question because I think what inherent in that, is that you’re, and correct me if I’m off here, but what I’m hearing in that is, gosh, I want to make a decision, but I don’t want this decision to be uncomfortable.
SARAH: I think it’s, I don’t want the decision to be uncomfortable in a way that I can’t make peace with, I guess, is sort of the addendum I would put there. Right? It’s-
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so how will you know if you can make peace with it? What’s your process for making peace with something?
SARAH: I think it has been, to your point, quite reactive. I don’t think too hard about the trade-off, right? I think if you go back to sort of that inflection point between chapters one and two, the company was going a certain way, I didn’t love it, but hey, I had this sort of role dangled in front of me. And I was like, well, that’s the thing. Right? And I sort of took the consequences that came with it, which was that it was a very hard couple of years. I was fairly miserable and I might not have made it through that storm. I think it goes back to that purpose work. Right? I think I have been overly oriented on the potential. I haven’t really honestly weighed the different options in the context of purpose. And so perhaps what will be clarifying is feeling like any decision that I would opt to take checks enough of that purpose box, versus just the potential because I don’t know… Look, I know myself, I don’t know if I’ll ever be totally comfortable with painful trade-offs, but I am feeling, Muriel, like it’s time to do something kind of different. And I guess what I would also say
SARAH: …what I would also say is, versus in the past where it’s been like, should I stay, should I go? You and I aren’t having a, should I stay, should I go, conversation, right? I know it’s time to go, it’s time to do something different. I think there’s something to be said around reframing the idea of taking a leap and being reactive to sort of the next great job that great, I’m putting great in quotes, is put in front of me, to having it be more hypothesis driven. Like, here’s what I’m trying to solve for, here’s what I think I’m going to get. Here’s what it may not happen, and here’s the catastrophe scenario, and would I be comfortable with that? But I am feeling kind of more confident after this conversation to be more action-biased. I think that has been what has been really weighing on me, is I don’t want to spend another six to 12 months stewing in my own thoughts around all this. I want to get out there and give it a go, whatever it looks like.
MURIEL WILKINS: You don’t want to spend another six months stewing over it, and yet, if you are not ready, that’s what you’ll do.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’ve reached an inflection point in our coaching conversation here, because Sarah has now said that it is time for her to make a change with much more conviction than she had at the beginning of our conversation. Now that we’ve taken the time to explore Sarah’s perspective about her career and start to parse out what is her purpose versus what is her potential, it’s time to start thinking about real action steps she could take coming out of the session, to start really working through the trade-offs available to her so she can be at peace with whatever comes next. And that starts with thinking not about what she doesn’t know, but what she does know.
I think one of the first steps is kind of like, what do you know for sure right now? Let’s start with that, because I think we’ve been focusing this whole conversation on what you don’t know. Let’s look at the flip side or the other side of that, or the other side of the sheet, which is, what do you actually know for sure at this moment?
SARAH: Yeah. So I know that I have built a mass of great experience in the industry that I’m in that is marketable. I know that I have a role now where I am almost through the learning curve of this particular role. I know that I don’t feel challenged enough at work, and I know that I have a strong desire to kind of accelerate my next learning curve in a way that just would be impossible in the same kind of company, in the same industry that I’m in. And I know that I feel eager to sort of spread my wings in a different context, I guess. I know I had that sort of feeling inside of me.
I also know that I have a strong reputation at this company, I am valued. I’m in a business where it’s so dynamic that you can’t help but learn a little bit, right? I’m not just pushing paper around, right? And I know that I want to make sure I’m running to something and I’m not in a position where I’m running away from something. It’s a good foundation, and so that potentially allows me to be fairly selective, but not too selective in where I go next.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, and this running to something, I mean, you just articulated what it looks like. Right? It might not have an exact name and company and position with it, but you articulated all of the elements. And so, what would you need to be able to move to action towards fulfilling those elements?
SARAH: I think I would probably need to put pen to paper in a very honest way around, what component parts does a next drill need to have, could have, doesn’t need to have? And if I’m being really honest, I think I need to do one version with the potential swirling in my head, and I probably need to do another version where I’m just really thinking about more purpose and then sort of seeing, to your point, how they track and where’s the commonality? Because my guess is if I did those exercises, they might… I’m not sure, I’m curious to know how sort of similar versus different would they be and how might that impact that list of trade-offs that I would or wouldn’t be comfortable with? So I think it’s a little bit of that homework of writing it down and seeing what it says back to me a little bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
SARAH: There are pieces I know, geography, general industry, general type of function, but I think some of what you and I have been talking about is the purpose and the scale and the transformation. And how does a potential next role tick those boxes, versus just being about where I started, which is what you said, a position and title?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I think that’s really interesting, Sarah, because I am not convinced that there is not an intersection. Right? I think it’s more a matter of what is driving you, what’s motivating you. And again, I think for up until now, the potential piece is what’s been the driver, and we don’t want to throw that in the trash, necessarily. We just want to ask, should that be the leading character in your story at this point, right?
And I think the question is, if purpose was now the leading character and potential was the backup dancer, right? I’m mixing different metaphors and analogies up here, but you get it. What would that look like? Okay? So up until now, it’s kind of been like lead with potential that’s put in front of you, and then if it fulfills the purpose, great if it doesn’t, it’s okay because I’m fulfilling my potential. And I think the pivot now is, what if I led with purpose? And oh, by the way, if I lead with purpose, is there a way that I can also fulfill my potential at the same time? And if there isn’t, I’m still going to lead with purpose, but if there is, great. Right? Maybe it accomplishes both, because it might be that you’re not necessarily ready to let go of the potential piece altogether. And you may never have to. I think it’s more around who’s in the driver’s seat right now, and let’s make sure potential comes along, but potential is not driving.
SARAH: And just to make sure I’m playing it back correctly, that is because having had potential in the driver’s seat for so long, it can lead you to be reactive. It can lead you to have burnout. It can lead you to be sort of ending in a place where you don’t want to go. Right? Is that-
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I think you named it earlier when you talked about potential, you said that it was very much outside-in.
SARAH: Outside-in, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I think it’s externally driven, right?
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Everything that you talked about kind of around what’s challenging you and where you feel conflicted, etc, it’s all an internal sort of knowing.
SARAH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So my sense is from what you’re sharing, is that you’ve got to make a bit of room for the inside out to also have a say in this. And the inside out is this purpose piece, that what you shared about being inflow, being able to just focus on growth and transformation and impact. And as long as that’s there, then you know you’re doing what you need to be doing. As you said, you could express that in a multitude of ways. You could do that as being a parent, you can do that as being a CEO somewhere, you could do that gardening, right?
SARAH: Yeah, right.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so the question is, is there a way that you can fulfill this inner purpose that you feel you have, right? So it’s still fulfilling living up to it, living it, not even living up to it, living it, while at the same time fulfilling this external potential of role and prestige and scale and impact until you may not want that anymore. You may or you may not, right?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That will be completely up to you, but the driving factor, who’s in the driver’s seat, there might need to be a little bit of a switch. Okay?
SARAH: Yeah, no, that makes a lot of sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: So this, writing it down, I’m almost imagining two sheets of paper or two columns with living my purpose on the one side, fulfilling my purpose on the one side, and then fulfilling my potential on the other side. And then writing them both out, and then looking at them both side by side and seeing, where’s the commonality? And maybe going through the exercise of, if the potential piece is in the driver’s seat, where would that lead me to? What would be the natural next step? And if the purpose side is in the driver’s seat, but not neglecting the potential, what would that lead me to? And do it for both. So let’s not abandon one for the other, I don’t think that’s the case here.
SARAH: Yeah, yeah. No, I think that makes a lot of sense. I think it is really helpful to hear it, sort of the two camps be articulated with the name, purpose and potential, because I think it makes it feel more manageable to then go and sort out a little bit. I think up until this point has felt like, I’m just confused. I don’t know why I can’t act. I feel paralyzed, but why? And so I think this has been really great framework for me to think about. And when I take a step out looking at myself and I’m like, gosh, I wonder what she will do. I wonder what she’ll do next. I think that sometimes, so yeah, I think there’s some work to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: And then how do you make a decision, right? I think that if you think about what you have framed around this inside-out and outside-in, purpose and potential, internal and external, if you can’t find alignment between the two, because I think that’s, again, there’s some dissonance right now. And so if you really just can’t find the intersection between the two alignment or integration between the two, then what it sounds like you’re ready to do today, which isn’t what you have been doing up until now, is that you’ll follow the purpose path.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? I think in the past you followed-
SARAH: Potential, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Potential and just assumed the purpose was going to be there. You didn’t really think about it, as you said. But before you make that step, let’s see if there’s alignment. And I’m not saying there will be, sometimes there isn’t. Then at least you know what decision you need to make, but let’s try to find the alignment and the overlap first.
SARAH: Yep, I think that sounds like a good plan. Onward.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so how do you feel now versus when we first started our conversation?
SARAH: I think I feel optimistic. I think I feel a bit, I think the fantasy was that it could all, it all will work out. There are no trade-offs, right? That’s always the fantasy is just like, I’m going to come in and they’re going to say you can do it all. But the reality I think, is that there are trade-offs, and it’s clear that there’s sort of two different sides of me that are needing to kind of get more in line. So I do feel like I have a plan. I think my biggest worry was that I wouldn’t sort of see a path to action, and I feel like I do see where that could go. I don’t think it’s going to be easy and I think also hearing you sort of describe the journey in chapters, I wonder if this is something I come back to a couple times over the course of my career, because as you said, it doesn’t always have to be 50/50 or whatever. It can wax and wane, and so what I’m really thinking about is kind of naming it, processing it, and then just recognizing that this is who I am and there’s probably going to be some negotiating between the two parts.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I love that. I love that it’s the negotiating between the two parts, because I think that what I’m envisioning is, at the beginning of our conversation, the two parts were not even seeing each other.
SARAH: Oh, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: One was hidden and the other was like, I’m here, fulfill that potential, you should because you can. And now it’s like, oh, well like I said they’re cousins, so let’s have a little family reunion. Let’s bring them together, have them shake hands and hug it out and say, “Okay, we both want to be here, right? What does that look like?” Okay? And then see what happens, and then revisiting it as you said, because just like your career up until now, it has evolved and there has been change, and it’s going to continue to do so, just as you do.
SARAH: Yep, perfect.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay?
SARAH: Thank you so much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you. Thank you.
SARAH: I really appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let me know how things net out for you.
SARAH: I will. Well, I’ll keep you posted on how the family reunion goes. Hopefully it’s cordial and amicable.
MURIEL WILKINS: It will be great.
While not everyone can make it to the C-suite, Sarah’s experience is common for many high-achieving leaders. They might continue to move up the ladder just because they can, always focused on reaching the next rung. But it can be really helpful when at pivotal career moments or potential transition periods, to really think deeply about why you do what you do, what you get out of it, and how much of it is about purpose versus potential. This is a distinction that Sarah has only just begun to really think about, and the answer is yet to be determined. But starting to put pen to paper is a great first step because it’s easy to avoid asking yourself these kinds of questions when you’re chasing the next product launch, the next quarterly financial returns, the next promotion. Sarah still has a lot of work to do on her own when it comes to deciding what trade-offs are worthwhile for her. She’ll still need to figure out what parts of her job are about purpose versus just potential. And it’s not my job as a coach to answer that for her, or anyone for that matter. What is my job is to help them see they have different ways of navigating the choices in front of them so that they can reach and answer to that question for themselves.
That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time-
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I think that the company now has a very unhealthy consensus culture, meaning that whenever we are making decisions that we are trying to making consensus from every party of the organization, and people just don’t take responsibility to moving forward. We just don’t get things done.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you: if you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to your favorite podcasts, and subscribe to the show. And while you’re there, leave a five-star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join me on CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com, where I host exclusive live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. You can also find me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins, and on Instagram at CoachMurielWilkins. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at CoachingRealLeaders.com.
Thanks to my Producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 4: How Do I Avoid a Career Plateau at Midlife?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show, we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sabrina to protect her confidentiality. She’s an HR leader at a global company and has been in the industry for a few decades.
SABRINA: I am a striver, and so I’m always looking for something new and challenging, a new hills. What was new for me when I made the transition to more broader HR was that it was something I had never done because I had such a strong technical background. I started my own business shortly after that, and what was exciting about that was the fact that I had to work with multiple clients. I reinvented myself multiple times during that time, and I think what just keeps me moving is that my desire to want to grow, I want to learn something new in every role that I take on.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now that she’s further along in her career and in a different place in her life, Sabrina wants to continue to pursue new interesting opportunities, but in a different way. She feels like she isn’t learning as much as she used to and is itching for that new challenge.
SABRINA: When I look at the first half of my career, the striving felt different because I was in my 20s, then my 30s and raising children who are now grown. I still am a single parent. The motivation was to make sure my family was very well cared for because I’m their sole provider. I think it’s a different point of view now than I had in the first half of my career. The striving feels different. I characterized the first half of my career as a hustle, like I was hustling a lot. And I don’t feel as motivated to hustle, but that doesn’t mean I don’t still have drive and ambition to do well and to do more things and to have greater impact in my work. And so, as I look at this, I guess I call it the back half of my career, I’m more looking at how I want to end it versus where I want it to go, which feels like a different perspective to look at my career. And so, I’m less clear what it looks like to strive at this phase in my career.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sabrina recognizes she’s still ambitious, but wants help in navigating what that ambition means at this stage in her career and life. So, let’s start the coaching session as I ask her how exactly she’s feeling about her work right now, and how that’s different from previous years.
SABRINA: I’m feeling less certain about what the next step should be, which is unusual for me because I’m a planner, although I know there’s not a straight path to anything because if anyone knows anything about my history, it has lots of curves and bumps. But before, I always had a vision for what was next, and right now, I don’t have a super clear vision, and so that feels different to me and uncomfortable. I usually know what mountain I’m climbing, and this time, I know I want to climb a mountain, I’m just not sure which one.
MURIEL WILKINS: What if this is the mountain?
SABRINA: It’s a great question.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know. You said it’s uncomfortable.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s challenging right now.
SABRINA: It is. I finished something really big last year and I have a lot of really big accomplishments in my life and people ask me when I’m going to just rest and be content in what I’ve achieved. And I did that for about a year, maybe a year and a half now, and now I’m just ready for whatever’s next and I’m just not sure what it is. And maybe the challenge is that I knew to be content. I’m thinking about when I end my career in 15 years, what do I want that exit to look like? Say for example, I exited my career now and stayed in my current role for the next 15 years, which I just don’t see happening, but let’s say that did, this wouldn’t be where I want to exit, it doesn’t feel like it’s the place.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. You used the term content, it’s not what you’re feeling is your motivation right now. And in no way when I said maybe this is the mountain, I said the mountain for now doesn’t mean that it has to be the mountain forever, but it’s feeling challenging to you right now. So, I’m curious about a word that you’ve used to describe yourself is as a striver. So, what does that even mean to you?
SABRINA: To me, it means it’s hard for me to be happy with where I’ve gone, like there’s always one step further I should have gone. This has been ingrained in me though since I was young, an A was never good enough, it was why wasn’t an A+? That wasn’t an A in an AP class. So, I think that that kind of mentality is still in my mind when I think about, I’m always striving for, I don’t want to say good enough, but maybe that’s what it is. Is this good enough? Am I happy with what I have now?
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, how does that notion of always wanting to go for something else that will make you happier because where you are right now is not good enough. How does that work out for you?
SABRINA: It’s gotten me where I am. I have a lot of track record of successes. I guess if I looked at the shadow side of that, it might be that I rarely have this sense I used earlier of being content because I’m always looking for the next big thing around the corner. And that’s why I said this last year where I took a pause and didn’t do that so much was good, but I’m antsy again.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, let me ask you a question. What would it look like for you to be content and look for what’s next around the corner?
SABRINA: That’s a good question. I don’t know. I’m trying to think of what that would look like. It’s funny, I studied paradox, so it feels like a paradox to me. I’m trying to figure out a situation where I could be content and strive.
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, I didn’t say strive. I said look for what’s around the corner. Because inherent in that is, and I don’t know, I’m just playing around here.
SABRINA: Yeah. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Inherent in what you’re saying is that the two are mutually exclusive. You’re either content or you’re looking for what’s next. And then inherent in that is also that there’s a causality. The only reason you would look for something around the corner is if you’re not content. I don’t know. I went to a phenomenal restaurant this past weekend. I was very pleased with the dish and I was looking at the menu like,
what else could I have?
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: If not today, maybe next time we come.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But I was very, very satisfied. But looking forward to what’s next.
SABRINA: Yeah. It’s a good perspective. And to say it that way, and I think about what I’m doing, I do think being content is, for example, I really do like my current role, enjoy it. I like the level of impact. I, a 100% think I could be delivering more and have higher level impact where I am. So, I feel content and proud of the work that I’m doing where I am, but at the same time, I’m having conversations outside of my organization and they’re not necessarily interviews, but it’s more of conversations with people externally to understand what’s happening in other places. And that to me is a little bit of looking around the corner to seeing what’s available, what my opportunities might be in my next step.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what does it feel like for you to do that?
SABRINA: That’s hard for me because I worry that it’ll distract me from the good work I’m doing in my current role. And I don’t want to distract from that because like I said, it’s a high impact role that delivers a lot of value to the leaders that I work with. And so, I don’t want to adversely impact that. But at the same time, it also excites me. I’m learning again by going external and just talking to people outside of my own organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Yeah, you said you have kids. It sounds like they’re adult grown, launched-
SABRINA: Mostly launched-
MURIEL WILKINS: Mostly launched, mostly launched. Hallelujah. I’m looking forward to the day. And that brings up a good point. I don’t know, as you were raising your kids when they were younger, were there ever moments when you could enjoy them for where they were at that age and look forward to when they would launch?
SABRINA: Yes, all the time.
MURIEL WILKINS: All the time.
SABRINA: All the time. Although I think with them in particular, it was more present, I hope. It’s interesting to compare the two. Sorry, I’m having a reflection on-
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s okay.
SABRINA: … all the great times that I had raising them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. But you said you were more present.
SABRINA: Felt that way.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what I’m not hearing is if I thought about the future and I thought about when they would launch, it would mean that I’m not being present, that I’m being distracted.
SABRINA: Yeah, it’s true.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, what’s the difference between that and being able to apply the same thing at work?
SABRINA: I don’t know what the difference is, but it definitely feels different. So, there’s this interesting duality I feel when I go outside of my organization just to explore, because I’m exploring. It feels like I have two motivations. I’m exploring to learn more that I can bring into my current role and grow it. But I’m also have a second layer of my listening and exploration where I’m listening and being attuned to what are the opportunities out there and how am I fostering these relationships outside. So, there’s a small piece of me that feels duplicitous in that way. And so, that just, I am trying to negotiate that piece a little bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: Duplicitous to who?
SABRINA: To the organization that I work for. And then the opportunities I’m looking for potentially outside of the organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because the organization you work for, I’m trying to understand why it would be duplicitous to them.
SABRINA: I think every organization hopes that the people that work for them have some level of, I hate to use the word loyalty, but loyalty to the work that you’re doing there and focus to the work that you’re doing there. I think that’s where that comes from.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So, then what is causing you to listen to it for yourself as well?
SABRINA:
Because I don’t feel content. That’s why, this is the part where I’m just trying to navigate it. I like my role. I love the people, at the same time there is that, is this it? Is this all for me? I can feel there’s more. I’m wanting to take that next step, whether it’s within my organization or outside, and I think I just want to be more secure in what that next step should be.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, what I’m curious, we’ve used the word, we’ve thrown around the word content for quite a bit. What does it even mean for you to be content and to know that this is a… What is it?
SABRINA: I’m not sure. What I’m pausing with is there’s a question that pops up in my head, which is I’ve been the kind of person that about every two to three years I want to do something new. When I ran my own business for a long time, it really worked out well because while I had long tenure as a business owner, I had multiple clients. So, it was always something new. And I wonder if the contentness has to do with, I just feel like I’m stagnating somehow in the current role. I just have this urge to do something new.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what would that newness look like for you?
SABRINA: I’ve been thinking about this a lot. I wonder if I like the… I don’t know if it’s adrenaline. I’m having a parallel experience where I think about my upbringing. I have a military upbringing where we moved every two to three years. I had to make new friends, start new relationships. And I’m wondering if there’s something around that, because I do enjoy the onboard part of my roles where I get to meet new people, where I get to learn about the business that I’m supporting and really dig in with leaders. I really enjoy that. And I’m not saying that there isn’t way more to learn in the organization I’m in, but I do feel that I’ve plateaued in the current role, and that’s why I’m saying I’m missing that opportunity to learn something new and grow into something new. My inclination or habit would be just to move to another role in another company versus try to build something new within the company I’m in.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s holding you back from doing that?
SABRINA: Going external?
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. From doing what you have been doing, which is, it sounds to me like what you’ve been doing that’s worked well for you at least up until now. I’m just self reflecting back, is you get a role, you do well in it, you learn, you grow. It’s challenging. You get to the top of the mountain, you plant the flag, and then you’re like,
okay, next mountain
.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: That keeps it fresh, and then it’s next mountain. Let’s keep it fresh. And the mountain is all about the learning, the newness, the creating, the growth. So, if you know that, right?
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is it that’s holding you back from continuing down that place? Why are we even having this conversation if you know that that’s the formula that’s been working, that you feel has worked for you?
SABRINA: I think my question circles back to the whole first half of my career, back half my career. I feel like in the first half I was more of a risk-taker, which is interesting being a single parent, I took a lot of risk to move around and make sure that I could raise my family. I think the biggest thing that’s different for me or that feels different for me goes back to my age. I don’t know if it’s a thing or if it matters, but I worry about ageism. I worry can I continue this as I continue to age? Can I continue to be in a role every two to three years? Do I have the stamina and will to do that?
It’s funny because every time I take a new role, at least in the last five years or so, I think, okay, this is the role I’m going to stay at this company until the end of my career. And then I’m there a couple of years. I’m like,
I’m ready for my next thing
. And so, it’s trying to manage this success formula that I feel like I’ve had with the prospect of what does it mean to age in my career as a woman with that same habit? Will that formula still work for me? I just don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that’s what it is. Will that formula still work for me? And I think what’s happened is because it has worked for you, there’s a bit of hesitation of letting it go that if I let it go, I don’t know. To you, what’s the opposite of a striver?
SABRINA: Complacency.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. If I let it go, will I become complacent? And what does complacency look like to you?
SABRINA: Someone who gets overlooked, someone who in a fast-growing company like what I’m in will soon become obsolete and not a values driver. And those are just all things that I don’t want to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: Because if you’re those things?
SABRINA: In my head, my HR head, I’m out of a job.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re out of a job.
SABRINA: Because I’m there to deliver value at the end of the day, and I know that, and I want to do that just from my own personal ethics point of view and my work ethic.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think it is, A, are you willing to let go of the formula? I don’t know what the new formula is, but are you willing to let go of the formula? And you don’t have to. That’s why I kept saying, “what’s holding you back?” You don’t have to. You keep doing it. You can keep using the formula that you’ve had. You really can. I really have no skin in the game, which way you go. But what I’m hearing from you is I don’t know if I can keep this formula up. So, if you feel like it’s not sustainable, are you willing to let it go and open up to potentially a different formula?
SABRINA: Yes. And I think that’s the motivation for this conversation. I don’t know that I’m willing to keep up the formula. I don’t know if it’ll continue to work. I feel like I’m hedging my bets. I think it’ll work maybe.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s the thing, if you change the formula, you can’t expect the same outcome. I am an avid, or was an avid runner, been running for over 25 years. I got news earlier this year that if you keep running, this is what’s going to happen, X, Y, Z, and you don’t really want that to happen right now. So, you have a choice. You can keep on running and this is what it’ll be, but you will be a runner, which is what I strongly identified with. Or you can do these things. One doctor was like, “You should become a swimmer.” I was like, “No, thank you. What’s next?” So, I decided, “oh, I’m going to become what’s called a rucker.” I’m going to walk with weights on my back. So, now I’m a rucker, and I’m a walker, and I’m a hiker and a sometimes jogger, but I am for now – no longer and probably in perpetuity – no longer a runner. It’s a different formula because the goal is I want longevity.
So, the formula you’ve had up until now has been your formula to be a striver. If you change the formula, I can’t guarantee you that the outcome will be a striver. What I’m curious about is how would it feel to you to no longer be a striver?
SABRINA: So, two things came to mind. The first was I felt my shoulders relax and go,
what a relief. I don’t have to strive.
The second reaction was,
well, the heck, what am I going to do? What does that mean? I’m just going to float around in space.
So, that feels like complacency. And so…
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, we don’t know. We don’t know if it’s complacency. We don’t know what it is, but we already know you don’t want it to be complacency, so we know it’s not going to be that. I knew I didn’t want to a swimmer, so let’s just not even include that as part of the options. Okay.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: There’s a whole bunch of other options that we can go after. But I think in order for you to be able to start seeing more clearly what this next phase looks like for you with self-cander, and with commitment, you’ve got to be able to also let go of what the picture has looked like for you up until now. And it doesn’t mean that that picture has been bad.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look at it with gratitude and appreciation for how far it’s brought you. And as I said, you can continue with it. You don’t have to change course. You really don’t. But there’s something in you that’s saying, I think it’s time. I think it’s time for me to change course.
SABRINA: Yeah. Yeah, it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, let’s not fast-forward towards what’s next without fully examining what we’re leaving behind or what we’re building on.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sabrina came to this coaching conversation at a point in her career that many face, a time where she felt like she had accomplished a lot, but was looking for something more exciting and wasn’t sure she wanted to strive in the same way she did when she was younger. In the early part of the conversation, it might have felt like we were going in circles a bit, but I kept pressing and asking questions to get to the bottom of certain phrases she was using, and certain assumptions she seemed to have. It was only after prodding a few times, a few different ways that some underlying concerns started to unearth themselves.
Sabrina is concerned about ageism in the workplace and worried if her blueprint for moving through her career in the past could even continue to apply as she looks toward the future. She felt connected to that formula she used previously because it had served her well. But I thought a helpful next step for her would be to explore what a different formula might look like. We’ll dive back in now as we explore some of her assumptions piece by piece and see if we can imagine what a different scenario or approach might look and feel like to her. This notion of… you mentioned you’re a little concerned about ageism. Ageism from who?
SABRINA: I think prospective employers, if I were to look outside or even potentially internally, if I think about, do people look at me and say, well, how much runway does this person have?
MURIEL WILKINS: And how have you dealt with isms in the past?
SABRINA: I just stomp them down and overcome them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. You strive through it.
SABRINA: I just do. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what’s different this time?
SABRINA: If I’m being completely transparent, I physically feel different. I feel it differently than I did before. So, there’s that piece too. It’s funny because when you said, how do I deal with all the isms? Because there have been plenty of isms that I’ve done in my career, but there’s a piece of me that’s tired of fighting the isms. You just get to a point where I don’t want to resign to it just yet. I’m not there yet. And I do feel like I have enough experience, perspective and ability to continue to, I don’t know if I want to strive through it, but continue to move through it. And the other point is that I’ve never faced this ism before because it’s the first time I’ve been this age. I don’t know how to navigate it because it’s new.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, this is really interesting. You’re right, you’ve never navigated it. So, it’s new. And what do you look for? You look for what sounds like it really juices you up are new opportunities, new challenges. So, when I said maybe this is the mountain, I think just the phase that you’re in, in and of itself, if you approached it as you did in the past, your new roles, which is, Ooh, it’s new. There’s a place for growth, this period of discomfort that you’re in, this tipping point, this inflection point in and of itself feels like it’s giving you exactly what it is that you always want, which is it’s new. It is soil for growth. I have to learn how to navigate it. The only difference is it’s not wrapped up in a nice pretty bow of a position within a corporation with a title and a team and metrics and a performance review and maybe a bonus and a reward at the end of the year.
But it has all the components that you said you’re looking for. It’s like, again, going back to the restaurant analogy, if you were to ask me, “Muriel, what do you like to eat?” Man, I like spicy food, savory with a touch of sweetness. I like complexity. You take me at a nice fancy restaurant and I’m like,
oh my God, this is great.
But then you hand me a dish with the same components, but it’s in a brown paper bag, and I’m like,
Ugh, why? You just told me these are the things that you like.
SABRINA: Yes, and I like them packaged and all the other things that we talked about.
MURIEL WILKINS: You like them packaged and all the things.
SABRINA: Yeah. So, I get it. I think you’re totally right. But the first thing that I thought of even before you said it was,
well, gosh, you’re right
. It is new. It’s a challenge. It’s different. It’s all the components. But the first thing I thought of was those are internal things that I need to work with, and I’ve never been a person that needs external recognition. But I guess the way that I receive that external recognition, it’s packaged in my title, my role, my greater impact and visibility in the organization. And so, yes, I can certainly tackle all of those, but who will know?
MURIEL WILKINS: But let me ask you a question then. Let’s fast-forward to 15 years from now, 20 years from now, because you said you see maybe another 15, 20 years in your career. So, 15, 20 years, career ends, and so then where do you get your motivation from?
SABRINA: That’s a scary moment. I don’t know yet. I think about that too. It’s a great question. I don’t know.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SABRINA: I tease when I say this, I tell people, I was like,
I’ll probably work until the day I die.
But at the same time, I know that I don’t physically want to work until the day I die. I would love to retire and literally sail off into the sunset.
MURIEL WILKINS: Don’t we all. Let me know when you’re leaving. I’ll be right there with you.
SABRINA: I might not be content on the sailboat. I think that too.
MURIEL WILKINS: You might not be content because you know why? Because the things that you said make you content actually, the new challenges, growth, feeling like you’re learning. You are basically saying they only make me content under certain conditions. And those conditions, Sabrina, are not conditions that are going to stay around forever. It’s like saying – and I’m just going back because you have kids. It’s like saying, “oh my gosh, when I hear my kids laugh, it brings me such joy. But you know what? I only liked it when they were under six years old. Now that they’re 20, I don’t want, it doesn’t count anymore.” I don’t know, still the laugh.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is it? So, the packaging is the external piece, and that changes. We don’t have control over that. We do not. But you and I are both aging as we speak. There is no control. Somebody’s trying to figure out how to stop that process from happening, but it ain’t us, and it is not happening in this coaching session. But what remains the same is whatever it is that brings you a sense of meaning and what brings me a sense of meaning. The container of it though might change over time. So, I think the real question is how do you maintain what you have identified as important to you, as valuable to you, as what provides you a sense of purpose, which is what motivation is. You find meaning in what you’re doing, you find a sense of purpose. How do you maintain that even when things around you might be changing? And in your case, what’s changing is your physical energy, your physical stamina.
So, what do you do? Do you keep pushing and saying, damn it, I don’t care that, that’s like me saying, “I don’t care that my body’s telling me not to run anymore. I’m going to keep running.” Sure, you can do that, but we all know where that leads to. Or do I say nope. What I love about it is the sense of energy that I get and the community that I have from it, and the sense of accomplishment. Okay. So, I want a sense of accomplishment. I want community and I want energy. I want endorphins. In what other ways can I get that besides running? Or do I say, you know what? That was good, but now I value something different. But sticking to it has to look a certain way in order for me to be content, is telling yourself a magical story, which has worked for you for a long time. The math ain’t mathing anymore, because there’s something in that story that is not following the storyline, and that’s your physical energy. In order for that to work, the physical energy has to be there based on your experience.
SABRINA: Yeah, I think that one of the analogies used that resonated was the container piece. So, I’ve spent my whole career, the container being the role, the compensation, the title as I continue to move through my career. And so, when you broke it apart and said, well, the hurdle I’m in right now, that’s newness, that’s challenge, that’s learning, that’s growth, that’s difference. But it doesn’t have the container of that professional container. And so, I’m just processing whether or not, or how to shift my perspective on the container that all of that’s in.
MURIEL WILKINS: Stop looking for the current container that you’re in to provide you with your full source of contentment. Because right now, it’s not giving it to you. That doesn’t mean you can’t be in it, but you’ve got to find another purpose for it.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You told me in the past, Hey, what enabled me to really do what I did is my purpose was I took care of my family. I was the provider. Okay. So, now that’s gone, you don’t have to do that as much maybe, or you have to provide in a different way. So, then it becomes, oh, but I still need something meaningful, something that I’m learning that’s new, that’s growth. Okay, but it’s not happening in my current organization. Okay. So, you have a choice. You can either go look for it in another organization, but then you said – I’m just pulling back everything you said. You said, “but I don’t know if I really want to, I don’t know if I want to keep climbing the corporate mountain because I don’t know if I have the stamina, but I still want something that’s new and that helps me learn.”
And so, all I’m suggesting is, okay. Then option number three is you get the newness and the learning opportunities and the growth, but it doesn’t happen within the container of being within the corporate job. It doesn’t mean you leave the corporate job. You don’t have to. All it means is that might not be what gives you the thing that you’re looking for.
SABRINA: Yeah, no, it’s good, because you also alluded to another point. The first part of my career, the motivation was raising my kids and providing for them. And now there’s a shift in, I always say I’m a halfway empty nester, because I feel like one, but not fully, but I am essentially one. And so, now the motivation is different. The why for working and striving in my roles feels different, but I’m just so used to how I’ve done it for so long that it’s tapping into a different motivation source.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s tapping into a different motivation source.
SABRINA: And I don’t really know what that is exactly right now.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think you have to figure out what that is before you figure out what the container looks like. And so, when you describe motivation, because right now you’re saying, “oh, if I’m motivated, it means I strive. I climbed the next mountain. That’s what it looks like. Or I get motivated to climb the next mountain.” What else could you be motivated to “fill-in-the-blank,” do you think at this point in your career?
SABRINA: The word that comes to mind is impact. That could be in my professional container, but it could be in other containers as well. I am questioning myself. I am not sure if it’s about seeing, am I shifting from growing for my own personal use so I can grow my career or growing as I teach others to grow and learn in their own careers? I don’t know how motivated I would be. I love doing that as a mother, raising my kids that way. I’m in a helping profession right now as a leader in HR, and so I do that professionally. I don’t know, maybe that’s my innate motivation, but I also, I’ve always been in a helping role professionally and personally. There’s a piece of me that’s tired too from that. It can be energizing at the end of the day to have to hold space for so many people all the time.
And so, I’m just pausing too, and this goes back to when I think about the second half, do I have the stamina and the will to continue to be in this very intense helping profession really? HR is not an easy space to be in.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think there’s a question around, because you also used the word teaching. The shift that I’d propose to you is to reframe it as thinking as what would it look like for me to help others while also helping myself? Because you framed what you’ve done up until now as a helping profession in helping others fully, and that that’s tiring. And I don’t know what that profession is. I don’t know what container it’s in, but I think it’s like where can you find your motivation? Would it feel more motivational now to say, I want to continue helping others, but I have to do it in a way where it’s also helping me?
SABRINA: Yeah. I’m just trying to picture what that is. I know we’re not going to, we don’t have the answer-
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re not there yet, Sabrina.
SABRINA: Yeah. I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re just now just envisioning the possibilities of what the parameters might be right before we get concrete and start picking out the paint colors. But you’ve got to have some guiding principles.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: The guiding principles that are going to motivate you. What is the new sense of motivation, as you said? So, I think that that’s part of the work is if this being the provider from my family, that’s not it anymore, and helping others in a way where it’s fully giving out, but not really receiving anything back beyond compensation title, all that stuff, that’s not it anymore. It doesn’t mean it’s bad. It’s just it’s not it. It’s not what is moving you, which is, it’s not giving you a sense of purpose and meaning. Okay, so we crossed that off the list. I think you need to go through just an exercise of saying, “okay, what else could it be that would, oh, by the way, still give me a sense of learning and growth?” And my sense is anything that you do that’s new is going to give you that sense.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Have you ever read the book
From Strength to Strength
by Arthur Brooks?
SABRINA: I’ve heard of it. I haven’t read it yet.
MURIEL WILKINS: Strongly recommend you reading it. But in the book – just so you know you are not alone – in the book, Mr. Brooks, he talks about the fact that we go through two phases in our career. And by the way, the first phase happens in our twenties, thirties, fortyish maybe. And the second phase is, usually hits in the forties and then in their fifties. And the first phase – and I don’t know if he made this up or if he leveraged some research, so don’t fully fully quote me on this. Vut he says, the first phase is built on what we call fluid intelligence. And it’s when we have this energy to focus and work and deliver and drive. We don’t tend to understand, but the data bears it out, is that that fluid intelligence is not in perpetuity. By the time we hit different age for different people – but there is a point in time where it starts being on the decline.
But instead of accepting that and saying, “how do I now recreate my work, my career, or how I operate, how I walk in the world in a way that aligns with where I am in that curve,” we resist it and then feel potentially burned out or whatnot. But what also happens is while this fluid intelligence happens, there’s a different form of intelligence that also kicks in, in the second half, and this is what he calls crystallized intelligence. And crystallized intelligence is all of the intelligence and the knowledge, and he calls it wisdom that you have built up over this span of time. And the real key is rather than resisting that the fluid intelligence is on the decline and trying to force fit it, the key is actually figuring out how do you leverage this crystallized intelligence that you’ve built as your career work, or just way of being in the second half. So, when I share that with you, and again, you should read the book because I’ve probably blasphemized what Mr. Brooks has to say, but when I say that with you, how does it land with you?
SABRINA: It makes a lot of sense because it’s funny that you used the words wisdom, because that was one of the first things I think about is I have so much to learn, but I have so many experiences and I’m able to connect so many different dots of that experience. There’s layers to it that there is a sense of wisdom that’s associated with it that I would never have had in my twenties and thirties because I can pick up books that I read 20 or 30 years ago, and I read them today, and I’m like, you have all the pieces to have all that content make sense. And I think, gosh, am I destined for a career as a professor? Is that my…
MURIEL WILKINS: But I think what’s happening though, SABRINA, is you’re rushing to try to figure out what’s the title associated with that?
SABRINA: That’s the container piece. I’m used to one container for all this. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I wish I could tell you, “Hey, by the time we get to the end of this coaching session, we’re going to name what that container is,” and I would be irresponsible as a coach to tell you that’s what’s going to happen in the next 30 minutes.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: But what I can tell you is I think you’ve cracked open that you’re in this new phase. You’re understanding that in order to fully immerse into this phase, which by the way, you’re not alone in. Okay.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: In order to fully immerse into this phase, there’s somewhat of a letting go of the previous phase. Not in a bad way, not because it was bad, but it’s just not where you are. And now figuring out, okay, all this wisdom, as you said, this experience, this knowledge, what is it? Number one, and how can I use it in a way that gives me meaning, that still brings me a sense of accomplishment and newness and oh, by the way, last thing, and then what container does it need to look? Do I want to get paid for it? Do I want a title with it? Do I want to be in a corporate environment? Do I not want to be in a corporate environment? Those are the finishing touches. So, it’s almost like you’ve got to stop picking out the pillows and the candle, the candles, and the lighting for the houses before you’ve actually even come up with the architectural plans for the house. Okay, because that’s just going to distract you.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, this notion of crystallized intelligence of being in this place where you yourself are recognizing, I do have this knowledge. I do have this experience. I’m tired of expending the type of energy that I have expended. I’m still willing to spend energy, but not the way I did before. Okay. So, how do you want to use it? Where do you want to use it? What kind of energy do you want to spend? What do you want your life to look like? So, it’s actually a pretty exciting place to be because I think this is a time when you said, “Hey, I’ve been helping other people.” I think part of the helping you is maybe it’s one of the first times where you’ve been able to say, “oh my gosh, I get to choose what my life can look like right now.”
SABRINA: I think you’re right, because I do think about that, the decisions I can make decisions on where I live, for example, are going to be different than I would’ve made 10 years ago, 15 years ago, because it would’ve been tied to my children and where they went to school and those types of priorities. So, it is different.
MURIEL WILKINS: It is different, but I sense a non-excitement about the difference.
SABRINA: Yeah. It doesn’t feel as exciting, and I am not a hundred percent sure why, except that it’s going to be different, which should excite me. But yeah, it just feels like, okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it’s coming back to me when you said, “is this it?”
SABRINA: I guess it doesn’t feel big enough. I think that’s why I immediately go to the solution of, well, what is it? But it just feels like more of the same. So, it feels like complacency a little bit to me still.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s pause here, because even within coaching sessions where we make a lot of progress, it’s easy to go backwards a bit, to loop back to some of the previous worries or focus on the same challenges again. This is common and very natural as we start to coach towards a new way of approaching a problem, that we go back to the same concerns. It’s not always a linear progression, and though we’ve opened the aperture a bit on possibilities, there’s still a long way to go. Change is hard. It can be frustrating, and it takes being iterative. Since this is natural, I wanted to dig in more to these concerns that Sabrina had, that were resurfacing, because returning to the why might just help us take another step forward.
Here’s the thing, I think you started off this conversation even by saying nothing ever really feels good enough, and I’m not judging that in any way, but if your mindset is that nothing is ever good enough, nothing is ever big enough, then guess what? It’s no surprise that this doesn’t feel big enough or good enough. You know what I mean? If I always think string beans are nasty, doesn’t matter what you do with them, I’m going, tell me it’s a string bean, I’m going to say it’s nasty. I don’t think string beans are nasty, but I couldn’t think of a different example.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, it’s your perspective, and I think you’re also at a place of choosing, is that the perspective that you want to continue to carry? Because it is not going to bring you the sense of contentment that I also think you’re seeking. You can’t have it both ways. You can’t think nothing is good enough, and yet I want to feel content and satisfied.
SABRINA: And that’s a newness that I need to tackle. That’s a challenge in and of itself, and I feel like I have been doing it progressively year over year trying to be more content with as is versus not good enough. But I think it’s something I just need to settle in, and it’s a mindset shift, obviously.
MURIEL WILKINS: And this notion of if you are feeling like, Hey, this might feel a little too restrictive for me, not a big enough impact, although we haven’t even really defined the impact. So, I think you’re assuming that that’s what it might, then maybe where you’re is good enough, but you’re not going to know unless you explore.
SABRINA: Yeah. I think there’s one last thing that I think about, and maybe I used to be a runner too. So, it’s funny that you use an analogy and I could no longer run because it just did a havoc on my knees. So, I’m a walker, although you gave me an idea. I was like,
I’m going to put weights on my legs –
MURIEL WILKINS: On your back, on your back.
SABRINA: …
On my back.
On my back. What I thought about is what we prescribed so far is I don’t like watching people pass me by, that I know that I could pass them. There’s a little bit of competitive edge in me a little bit that I need to navigate past too, and I don’t want to call it FOMO, but maybe it is a little bit of that, but I don’t want to watch people passing me by when I know it’s like, gosh, I could have climbed that mountain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sure, you could have, but do you need to?
SABRINA: No, not all of them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Do you want to?
SABRINA: Some of them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so climb the ones that you want to climb. Not every mountain needs to be climbed.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think the way you’ve been operating is, oh, there’s a mountain. I’m going to climb it.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why? Because it’s a mountain. It’s a mountain. It’s high. It’s a challenge. And if I get up there, I won.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And now you’re saying, “but I’m tired.”
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, then what does winning look like for you right now? Does it mean climbing every mountain and does it mean climbing the highest mountain?
SABRINA: Yeah. It’ll be a mindset shift. And I think if I think about it from a professional branding perspective too, it’ll be a brand shift. It’ll be different for people to see me not climbing big mountains. So, yeah, it’ll just be different.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think part of what I’m hearing also is a concern, going back to this word complacency that you talked about. Oh my gosh, if I don’t climb mountains, I’m going to be the person just chilling on the side, not doing anything, being a slacker, God forbid. Listen, I want to be a slacker. Give me this. I’m just kidding. Sometimes. I-
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: … sometimes. But again, I go back to the two aren’t mutual. I don’t think you’re seeing the middle ground.
SABRINA: Yeah, you’re probably right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which is you are at a place where you can define what it means to win, what it means to… And I’m using the word “win” because you said you’re competitive. If it is to continue doing what you’re doing, then do it. But I’m hearing you say that’s not it.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, maybe you’re at the moment right now actually. I always think – somebody told me this a long time ago, and I think they were right. I resisted it when they said it. They said, “Look, you know what it means when you’re not ready to make a decision.” And I was like, “No, what does it mean?” And they said, “All it means is you’re not ready to make a decision. You’re just not ready to do anything right now, and it’s probably because you haven’t spent enough time, not in a negative sense, but grieving what it is that you may be letting go, and getting excited about what’s coming. But if you’re looking at what’s coming with this dread, it may not be time.”
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Nobody’s forcing you to do anything right now.
SABRINA: No. No one’s forcing me. Goes back to my age. I do feel, I don’t know why I’m so stuck on it, but I do feel like there’s a clock on it in some ways. I don’t want to say I’m rushing to figure out what’s next. Like I said, it took a year, but that year was a long year of me, and now I’m just coming out of it and I’m like,
I can’t just sit around and wait for this epiphany to come, and is there anything intentional that I can do
?
MURIEL WILKINS: But what we’re doing right here is very intentional.
SABRINA: Yes, agreed. Agreed.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I would encourage you to not think that pausing and being reflective and thinking through this and at times not doing anything about it, just letting it marinate till you know what to do immediately next, that that’s not part of doing the work. That is part of doing the work around this.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: This is why if I had a huge ego about me being a coach and I was like,
oh my gosh, I need to perform and I need to give a result right now,
we would be trying to come up with a list of, here are the 10 different roles you could take on next. But I don’t know if they would answer your question.
SABRINA: No, I’m smiling because I’m thinking about when I did run and when I was training for all these half marathons that I did, that as part of the training they tell you, you probably know this, that you need to take your rest days. So, you can probably imagine how I approached that, the high achiever that I am. Do you think I took rest days?
MURIEL WILKINS: No.
SABRINA: No. And so, as a result, look what happened. I can’t run anymore. I ran my knees till basically I can’t run. It hurts to go over three miles. And so, if you layer that onto this, what I’m managing now professionally, I think that if I keep running in the professional sense, they’ll come a point too early. I wasn’t ready to retire from running when it happened. I think that if I layer that onto my professional world, I could hurt my professional knees to the point where I’ll be really walking and doing something slow. So, I think there is some value in what you say in terms of letting it marinate to take some rest days, multiple, to figure out what’s next.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. And I don’t think you’re as far away from figuring out what’s next as what you think. I think you have A, determined that something different needs to be. That’s a huge step. Accepting that, yeah, I don’t want to keep going at this pace that I’ve been going at. Okay. So, now you know that what’s the pace? B, you’ve identified that you want to be able to leverage all this knowledge and experience and wisdom that you’ve accumulated. Okay. C, that learning and growth and newness are still things that you value. Okay. So, those are three areas already. D, we don’t know what the container looks like, but there’s a possibility. I think this is actually the part you have to dig into. How tied am I to the current type of container that I’m in? Meaning does it have to be in this corporate structure, reputable company with a brand, or am I open to different containers without identifying what the container is?
That’s like what you said. Is it that I need to stay living in this geographic region, or am I open to other geographic regions without yet knowing what those other geographic regions might be? That’s a choice. And just be honest with yourself. There’s nothing wrong with saying, “Nope, I need to stay right here. Nope, I need to stay in this type of container no matter what.” Okay, so that becomes a non-negotiable for whatever’s next. But understanding that with every choice that you make, there’s always going to be a trade-off. So, maybe it could be that you could reframe if you said, “Hey, I want to keep it in this corporate container. Okay. But I’m going to pivot in terms of what I do, how I do it, et cetera.” Maybe it would mean that you’re no longer on the high potential track or whatever the track, the fast track. Okay, that’s the trade-off. Are you okay with that? The end of the day, it’s as long as you can live with it.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, tell me where you’re landing right now.
SABRINA: I’m landing on, I feel a little bit more excited than I did about 10 minutes ago when I felt flat, but the idea of exploring this different container pieces, I was reflecting as you were talking because I’ve had a couple of opportunities come across where the container would be very different than the one I’m in, and I’ve continued to explore it a bit, but on the edges going, I don’t really know if that’s the right container, because I really like this flashy container that I’m in, but it makes me think about, well, what is it about the flashy container I really like? And when you talk about trade-offs, what are the trade-offs that I’m willing to take? And also knowing that whatever decision I make, I know this too, and I’m going to keep this one. Whatever decision I make, it’s not permanent. I know that from my history that nothing lasts forever, and whether it’s voluntary or involuntary, it doesn’t have to be permanent, whatever the next container is, I could choose to go back to the flashy container if I wanted to. It’ll still be there.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So, maybe that gives you a sense of security to be able to go and explore.
SABRINA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I think when you look at what is it that you like about the flashy container, I would encourage you to also look at to what extent are you holding onto it tightly? What does it provide for you, and do you need that or do you not need that? Okay.
SABRINA: Yeah, that’s a good question.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I think where we are is that you have some questions that you need to sit with to continue to work through before you can get to, here’s going to be what my exact next step is. Goodness gracious, you’ve had 20, I think, 20, 25 years in your career. Don’t diminish how much to invest in figuring out what the next 20 years look like. Okay.
SABRINA: Yeah, it’s true. But I have all this wisdom. I should know.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s a process, okay. And you’re going through the process. I think to keep the momentum going, I would ask you to commit to spending some time, even if it’s 15 minutes a day or an hour a week, where you are, I know it might be hard for you, but I don’t know, but sit somewhere and maybe write out, keep a journal of just what your thoughts are, and you have the questions. So, let’s just, to ensure that there’s some follow-through. I’m going to give you a little bit of homework. Okay.
SABRINA: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: The assignment is to journal with some… I just want you to stay in questioning mode right now rather than the answer. Okay. The answer will come. We landed here with a bunch of questions that you could start with. So, I’d like you to pick what is the first question that you want to start with next week that you’re going to sit for 15, 20, 30 minutes, and just without judgment, write out what you think. What’s the question you want to start with?
SABRINA: I think the question I want to start with was, the one I wrote down was how tied I am to my current container. I want to explore my connection to this container I’m in or I have.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, start with that and then see where it leads you.
SABRINA: Yeah. Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think you are on the path.
SABRINA: Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you.
SABRINA: I appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely.
As much as people come to coaching to sort through career challenges, we also know that we can’t separate work from the rest of our lives. The two are intermingled, and Sabrina’s challenge was partly that, figuring out how to adapt her working style and approach as her life started to feel different. At any career transition phase, it’s important to go back to your goals and motivation, to make sure you have a basic understanding of what you want and what is driving you. Once you have that foundation, you can see how the ways you’re viewing things might be limiting, or how you can change your perspective. In Sabrina’s case, she felt less content at work than she had hoped, but in the background, she felt her age might be impacting her energy level and felt her motivation change as her kids were no longer as dependent on her.
As I walked Sabrina through articulating what really mattered to her, we were able to get a fuller picture of everything that was going on in her life and how that was impacting her work. Then we could take a step back and really start working through how her work could change or where she could look for motivation and energy in endeavors outside of work. What’s nice is she doesn’t really have to make a decision right now. She can let things marinate a bit more, but it was really important for her to realize don’t focus solely on that external container, but instead focus on the substance of what’s inside and make that what you’re really looking for. That’s it for this episode of Coaching Real Leaders. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I have made a transition that very few people are able to pull off coming from, let’s say, the working class of the industry into the office job, and that’s where I’m struggling with getting to the next level.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify or wherever you listen to subscribe to the show and leave a five-star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at CoachingRealLeaders.com. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Do I Lead Change When There Is Stakeholder Resistance?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing.
Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Jessica to protect her confidentiality. She’s a senior executive at a multinational company with decades of experience in her function. Jessica recently made a big move leaving a longstanding position in Asia to move to Europe to take on more responsibility with her company and tackle a big new transformational project.
JESSICA: I always wanted to have experience working in different country and working in different culture. So I think that is one thing that motivated me to really get out of my comfort zone and moving to a different culture. The scope of this global project is actually to really transform the organization and really setting up the organization for the future. I have very strong ambition that I believe that I’m able to really influence because I have lots of thoughts, and I wish that I’m able to deliver them through this transformation. So I take lots of courage to take this role, even though I know that the role itself is a little bit difficult.
MURIEL WILKINS: So far, Jessica feels like her effort in transforming the organization has been hit or miss. There have been both positives and negatives, but she isn’t sure she’s really delivering what she set out to deliver.
JESSICA: I’m able to really open up my career experience. So, in the past I was mainly leading large team, so there’s quite a bit of management work. For this specific role that I’m actually doing a lot of change management and project management, so I don’t have team working together with me, so I need to do lots of hands-on work myself. So that’s definitely a very different area that I have been working in. But the challenge part is that overall I think we were not able to manage the successful project in terms of really change the mindset of people and really for [inaudible 00:02:33] to change the way that we want to change this organization.
MURIEL WILKINS: A quick note that part of this conversation ended up centering around cultural bias, which may be a trigger to some listeners. These situations can be nuanced to deal with as an executive coach when we’re there to support the client at the individual level rather than directly support change at the systems level. But more on that later. For now, I wanted to start by digging in a bit deeper around what made Jessica feel like her transformation project hadn’t succeeded so that we could articulate the leadership problem she really wanted to address.
JESSICA: First of all, this transformation is not a strategic-driven transformation, it’s an efficiency-driven transformation. So if you look at the numbers, yes, we does deliver all this efficient numbers. However, I think the number is really the consequence if we do the things in the right way. I think that where we are not able to deliver is really this mindset change, because I think basically what we want to change is really to moving people from one status to another one, which they really building this new teams for a better effectiveness and a better efficiency. For that level of change, I don’t think that we’re able to manage that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So it sounds like the metrics at the surface level, the transformation effort is working, but in terms for it to be sustainable, which requires a certain mindset and change in behavior, that doesn’t seem to have stuck, is what you’re-
JESSICA: Yes, you’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. And what is the mindset change that you were looking to implement?
JESSICA: First of all, it’s really about collaboration, because I do believe the success of an organization is that everyone collaborates with each other. The second part is that people are really more digital focused, because our profession, a lot of things are changing. The external environment are changing. The challenge of business are changing. So if we do not go for the digital, then we’re really doomed to be kind of lacking off the support for the business. I don’t think that is two parts we’re able to deliver to my expectation.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, to your expectations. Was everyone else expecting the same?
JESSICA: I think you are asking the better question. Probably not.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What were they expecting?
JESSICA: Yeah, that’s complicated because during the transformation we have a lots of people change. The head of this organization actually was asking to leave the company and we bring in a new leader during this transformation. So if you look at expectation from the previous leader with new leader, so they’re already different. And then if you look one level down, some people are really want to maintain as much as possible their existing scope, and some people are really trying to do something much more innovative. So I think people are in very different stage of expectation.
MURIEL WILKINS: So everybody wants transformation, but there’s different expectations around what the transformation is going to both require and result in.
JESSICA: Yes. Yes. I think that’s actually one of the things that we didn’t do well because I think at the beginning of transformation you’re supposed to make sure that everyone have the same understanding about this target picture, so where we want to be. And once we have that picture being clear and clarified and aligned, then we say, “Okay, this is our roadmap towards that target picture.” Unfortunately, I don’t think that we even have that target picture aligned.
MURIEL WILKINS: Now you’re here. Why are you here? What are we talking about?
JESSICA: My problem which I want to bring for the discussion is really about the leadership in different cultural contexts. I came from China and I joined this role in Germany, which I thought I understand the difference between two cultures, but I still have this question that how am I able to leverage my culture background as advantage but not seem as a disadvantage? For example, sometime I hear this criticism that, “Okay, hey Jessica, you’re just too Chinese. You cannot really bring your Chinese version of leadership into this global environment,” which I probably not fully agree with, but somehow I probably have not yet able to prove that actually this is not because my leadership is too Chinese, is I’m not able to break down this so-called bias from the other parts and really drive the change. So again, I think my challenge is that how I’m able to really use this as an advantage.
MURIEL WILKINS: So just let me ask you a question before we dive into that.
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: How did it land with you when you were, I’m assuming, told, “Jessica, you’re being too… “ Well, what exactly did they say?
JESSICA: Too Chinese.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re being too Chinese.
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. How did that land with you?
JESSICA: So I feel very angry. I disagree with that and I feel I’m not being understood in the right way.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What was your response?
JESSICA: I said that I don’t think it is right conclusion. I think that the company now has a very unhealthy consensus culture and people just don’t take the responsibility to moving forward. So for me that I say, “Okay, if this is a decision that’s already made from the upper management, now we have to [inaudible 00:08:21] to that.” So I think this is the way that I understand the way to make things work versus my colleagues here in Germany understand that.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what is it that they’re expecting?
JESSICA: They’re expecting everything will be explained about why things are happening and why people are being impact to different ways and how each one of them can be involved in the decision-making and how they can be treated as the important party of this whole decision-making.
MURIEL WILKINS: So on the one hand you have stakeholders who feel from you really that they want to be involved more and feel like they are a player in the decision-making and the part of the process. And from your standpoint you’re saying, “Hey, if we keep getting caught up in consensus… “ What’s going to happen if you keep getting caught up in consensus? What’s the impact of doing it the way that they want to do it?
JESSICA: We just don’t get things done.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I just want to take a step back for a second because, I mean, there’s many ways we can go with this conversation, but I’m just going to point out two for the sake of simplicity so that you can choose your own adventure. On the one hand, we can look at it from a cultural standpoint, which is there are folks that you work with who basically said to you that what you’re doing is based on culture, which kind of boxes you in, and which you’ve already said, “I don’t think that’s the case. It has nothing to do with culture.” And at the other hand you’ve also said, “But they want to do things the German way,” which is more everybody’s involved, et cetera, which in a way, even though you didn’t say that’s so German, but in a way boxes them into their culture. So one approach we can take is look at it purely from a cultural standpoint, which is basically boxing everyone in. The other way is we could say, “Oh, there’s a stylistic difference,” which one approach is let’s be very consensus-driven, it’s a stylistic approach versus what you’re saying, which is, “We have to keep it moving and decisions need to get done or else we’re never going to get anything done.” So there’s the cultural approach, there’s the stylistic approach. They are very much connected to each other, but they’re also different. And so what I’m going to ask you is, which path would you like to take?
JESSICA: So for sure stylistic.
MURIEL WILKINS: What makes you choose stylistic?
JESSICA: I think stylistic is really behavior based, so it doesn’t matter which culture you come from. It’s behavior that defines your style, which somehow shows difference between people. If we’re able to resolve the difference between style of different parties, then I think that’s the right way to go. I don’t think we should hang on too much on the culture piece because that’s really coming from the background you are coming from. So, in the corporate world, I think the majority piece are really play into the party is about style.
MURIEL WILKINS: Like. By the way, I mean you said it’s the right way. There’s no right or wrong. We’re just choosing one path, but we’ll go the stylistic way with the full awareness that culture impacts behavior and culture impacts style, for sure, and yet we have a choice in how we behave.
JESSICA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want to jump in here and be very clear about the situation Jessica’s facing and my response as her coach. A comment like, “You are being too Chinese,” is a comment that is not acceptable in a workplace context or anywhere. As a coach, I work within the systemic bias that exists both in society and at many organizations. My role is to help my clients find the agency within those systems if they are negatively impacted by them. In situations like Jessica’s where a client experiences bias of any kind, it’s my job to acknowledge and not dismiss it. But it isn’t my place as a coach to resolve systemic bias on their behalf.  Let me be clear that in no way does this mean I absolve the leaders who are exacting the bias, but they are not the ones sitting in front of me, Jessica is. And it’s my responsibility to support her leadership efforts in spite of the challenging context.
I’ll admit though that at this point in the session I had a bit of a, Wait-what-, I-can’t-believe-they-said-that moment when Jessica shared what her colleagues had said. But as a coach, I have to keep the focus on how my client is experiencing any situation, bias or otherwise, and not project my own feelings or lived experiences onto her. This is a key component of being in shape to coach. The best thing I can do, as always, is to help the coachee see what choices she has in front of her so she can get unstuck even if nothing else around her changes. There’s no right or wrong answer, but in Jessica’s case, that meant following her down the stylistic path rather than that of bias.
So, I want you to bring me into your world. Let’s just set up a scenario. You’re sitting in a room with some of your colleagues working through some of this transformation work, let’s say, and you get this feeling of, “Here we go again, it’s a difference in style. And I feel like I’m at a disadvantage because of my style. It’s not the same style. How do I work with it?” Tell me how you actually get to that place. What happens? If I were in the room, what would I see?
JESSICA: So just imagine if there’s a room that I’m sitting there with my colleagues there. We are discussing a topic, let’s say, how we plan this project. My expectation of this meeting is that okay, we are able to deliver a set of timeline, say, okay, have the project applied in two weeks and we execute, blah, blah, blah. So that’s my purpose of this meeting. And my colleagues come to this meeting even though they understand they were invited to discuss a timeline, all the question they’re asking is, “Why we need to do this transformation? Why did you change this? Why did you change that? Tell me who made this decision, how the decision was made. Who has the right to do this?” I mean, I cannot answer that because I’m also not the one who made the decision about this change. So whenever you want to move and say, “Okay, let’s talk about the timeline,” people just diverge about another discussion about, “Okay, this is now going to work. I have the team member who doesn’t understand and me as a manager, I cannot be supporting this change, blah, blah, blah.” So basically after the whole meetings that we’re still not able to come up to the final timeline. So that’s one of the typical situation we might have.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So you, on the one hand, are ready to put some steps into place to execute on the change that needs to happen on the transformation project. You’re ready to move on. You’re in the car ready to go. You are going, actually, and they are standing outside of the car saying, “Wait a minute, I don’t know if I really want to go. Tell me why I should get in this car with you.”
JESSICA: Right. That’s the piece which I cannot… What I tell them is that, “Okay, the car is running,” or maybe let’s say that the train is started, “if you want this organization to continue going, you have to embark the train and ride along with us. Otherwise, you can choose not to ride,” meaning that you can leave organization. But a lot of time people just standing there, they do not want to leave and they just complain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. So it’s so interesting, right, because I used to ride the Long Island Railroad in New York long, long time ago at the beginning—there’s a point to this story—long, long time ago… and what you’re describing is bringing that up to mind. I used to stand on the platform and when the train would pull up, sometimes I’d have a friend with me or somebody nearby and they’d say, “Oh, let’s get on the train, let’s get on the train,” but all the time there would at least be one or two people standing outside of the train doing something, talking on their phone, maybe back then smoking a cigarette. It wasn’t till the person who runs the train, I don’t remember what they’re called anymore, the station master would come out and yell, “Everybody, get on the train,” would those folks actually get on the train. So sometimes the outcome is the same, getting on the train, but who delivers the message and how the message is delivered is what makes the difference. I don’t know if that’s the case here, but what I’m going to ask you is—what I’m envisioning is that you’re trying to get these people to buy in to this project, and it sounds like they’ve never really bought in. And so, who is responsible for getting them to buy in?
JESSICA: Yeah, I think that’s actually the very good question. I always thought that I have the responsibility to be that so-called train master, but in reality I’m not. I am not empowered and I’m not entitled to do that as it’s not my scope. I’m more like the people who execute the things. But the challenge with us is that this so-called master of our train, he didn’t take this responsibility to do that. The question is that if I’m not able to influence this master to do his work or her work, then at least I can do something. So that’s always say that, okay, if we do not have that person, the question is that, how I can do within my capacity? That is all the question I’m asking myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Understood. And I think that’s a great question to ask yourself, what can you do within your capacity? So one of the things that you can do—which it sounds like that’s what you’ve been trying—is trying to convince them directly to get on the train.
JESSICA: Yeah, that’s what’s happening the very beginning, and I gave it up already.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Okay. So you chose two approaches. One approach was I’m going to try to convince you to get on the train. I’m trying to convince you to get on the train. You’re not getting on the train. So nothing happened. Your next approach was, I’m just not going to do anything.
JESSICA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Did anything change after that or they’re still standing on the platform?
JESSICA: They’re still standing on the platform.
MURIEL WILKINS: They’re still standing on the platform, okay. So we’re one, one, those things are equal. So now we’ve got to think about, okay, if they’re not listening to me directly and when I do nothing, nothing happens as well, what are my other alternatives? As you put it, what do I have the capacity to do? So what else do you have the capacity to do to try to influence these folks to buy in to this project and take a couple steps forward that you haven’t yet tried? What other options do you have?
JESSICA: I guess there could be a few options. The first one is that I can continue maybe approach this master not only to yell, but maybe the master can give a little bit push for the people on the platform, say, “Hey, please get on the train.” Maybe they can move. I don’t know, that could be one option. The second option is that I could continue working with the people who are already on the train and maybe some of them may have certain connections or interest over the people on the platform and ask them, “Hey, we are leaving. Hey, can you guys come on?” Or [inaudible 00:21:17] along with us. The third option is I continue the train with whoever the people which already are boarded and pushing some efforts forward. Or maybe the first option is that I leave the trip myself. Another thing to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: The fourth is what? You exit the train?
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You leaving? Okay, that’s an option. That is an option. Okay. So the first two I just want to name, okay, because the first two that you named, which is, hey, maybe I can influence this senior level person who really hasn’t been making the call the way they need to, maybe I can influence them to try more at getting buy-in from these stakeholders. So we’re going to call that the sponsor approach or the sponsor champion approach, which is going to an executive sponsor who can champion this and work with them. It’s option number one. Option number two is there are some people on the train with me, maybe I can get them to influence everyone else. And so that’s what we call the ambassadors, the ambassador approach to help be your delegates and see if they can work some magic. And so, you’re working behind the scenes with them.
JESSICA: [inaudible 00:22:39].
MURIEL WILKINS: Option number three is we’re just going to try to hold it all together on our own, the few of us who are on the train, and keep it moving. Last option is I take my bags off the train, I get out of here, I’m not doing this. So let’s look at the first two. So with the sponsor, because you talked about one person, when you think about a sponsor, do you have more than one individual who potentially have the power or the wherewithal to be able to influence buy-in from those who are resisting the change?
JESSICA: I think this is tough question. I mean, I think in reality we should have multiple sponsors who have the position to influence people. Unfortunately, those individuals or this multiple sponsor at this moment, I don’t think they want to do that due to various reasons. I think lots of senior leaders are really just wait and watch how things are moving.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Correct me if I’m wrong, but it sounds like even at the executive level there’s some resistance to this transformation?
JESSICA: Yeah, I think so. I think people are not consistently understand how they want to be in the future.
MURIEL WILKINS: Which then makes it understandable for their team members presumably to also say, “Yeah, why should I do this?” So that brings up a bigger question, which is, is this initiative, is the work that you’re trying to do, has it truly been set up to create the transformational results that you are trying to move to? If what I’m hearing from you is there’s an absentee sponsor, you look around at who else could have the level of influence that would help sponsor this, there’s nobody truly to be found, that is trickling down to the team. You are not empowered to push it forward without those folks. From your standpoint, is it even possible to move the train under that type of setup?
JESSICA: When I listen to you speaking all these things, I think it’s very sad that I don’t think this transformation is set up in a way to be successful. I didn’t want to admit that in the first part. I always thought that there’s at least some way that we can manage. But yes, I agree that this is not a transformation that will be set up to success at the very beginning. So the question is that I gave up everything, that I move my family together with me to a new country, what’s the option do I have? So do I stay just to manage this unsuccessful things to the end, or I should already just stop and looking for something else?
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand that’s hard, and I want to acknowledge you saying, “Hey, I didn’t want to kind of face it, but potentially that’s what’s happening.” You said, “I agree with you.” I’m not making the assessment that that is what’s happening. It was just a question, right? A question of, is it a possibility? What I do want to point out is that there’s a difference between it being set up for success and it ultimately being successful. What I’m hearing in the latter part of what you just said is, Well, it wasn’t set up for success. Now that I think about it, I don’t think it was set up for success, therefore it’s not going to be successful. We don’t know that now. I think what it does is reframe how we’ve been approaching it so far because we’ve been approaching it from the middle in terms of the execution. In reality, if the execution isn’t going well and based on what you just said, we need to go back to the setup. Is there an opportunity to reset this thing up in a way that lines it up with the results that you’re hoping to get out of it or that the organization is hoping to get out of it? So, we need to ask ourselves, is there a potential for a re-setup, a course correction in the setup for success, okay?
JESSICA: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: So if you were to reset this up, you got an opportunity… Have you ever played the Monopoly game, the game Monopoly?
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes you pull that card and it says, “Go back to home and collect your $200.”
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Just as you were about to be sent to jail, it says, “Go back home, get your $200.” So that’s the game we’re going to play right now. You get to go back to the beginning and set this up. Okay. If it were up to you, knowing what you know now, what do you think the setup conditions need to be in order to get this train actually moving in the direction it needs to go? What would be the setup if there were three things?
JESSICA: So if I have all the power to reset this transformation from the very beginning, the three things that I would do is firstly I would install a very strong leadership team in the way that they have an aligned division for this organization that they want to build. The second part is to really have the change story that brings people along together and saying that, “Okay, this is why we’re doing this transformation and what are we expecting this transformation can deliver to us.” And third one is to having a lot of investment on the change management.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So first is strong leadership team aligned on the vision. Number two, articulating a story to bring people together around that vision, to corral around that vision. Number three, investment in change management. By the way, everything you’re saying is sort of textbook how to do transformation. And Jessica, it’s no wonder, I mean, transformation is hard.
JESSICA: Yeah, I know.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, let’s just take a beat and acknowledge that. Transformation is hard at an individual level and now you’re trying to do it in the collective masses level. It’s hard. So the fact that you are facing some difficulty just from a reality check standpoint, that’s normal. I don’t think in my 20 years of doing this I’ve ever come across somebody who is in charge of, or part of, involved in a transformation project or initiative who’s like, Oh, piece of cake, this is easy, no challenges, everybody’s moving along. There’s no resistance. Never. It’s hard. But what I do know is the setup plays a critical role and is what we want to go back to, the basics, before we can think about the other things, okay?
JESSICA: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: So you’ve lined up these three things. Of those three things, is there anything that is within your scope, your capacity that you could actually affect directly?
JESSICA: No.
MURIEL WILKINS: No.
JESSICA: Yeah, this needs coming from upper management.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So then my question is what are the conversations and discussions that you have not yet had that you think needs to be had that would help in potentially formulating a reset?
JESSICA: I did have such a conversation with our top management. So I told this person very explicitly that how things are moving right now, what I think things are not working and how should we change the setup. I think mentally this person want to change, but in reality you just don’t see any of the actions from this person’s point of view.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right. So, is your sense that the actions will come at a later time or you don’t think they’re going to come at all?
JESSICA: I don’t know, to be honest. Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: What I’m doing is sort of kicking the tire to see if you have tried all of the different things at your disposal. What I’m not doing is in any way trying to create this scenario where no, no, no, no, no, of course you can make this work. I don’t know, but we should at least try to check the boxes to see are you doing everything within your capability to try to make it work before we go to, okay, the train is not moving anytime soon. Maybe it will, but I’m not sure. So now what do I do?
It’s reminding me of that global tech shutdown that shut down the airlines all around the world and people have been stuck in airports for what feels like five days at a time, right? You’re in the airport and you’ve tried to go to the air people, the people at the counter saying, “Hey, can we get this plane moving?” And they’re like, “Nope.” You’ve called the airlines, you’re on hold for 10 hours. You’ve done all the things. So now you’re at the airport and you have a decision to make. Do I wait it out because the plane might eventually move? Or it might not, okay? Or do I leave and drive myself home or decide to extend my stay wherever I am for another couple days till things settle down and then I’ll come back and try again? I don’t know why we have all these transportation analogies today, but something in the air. We went from cars to trains and now planes. All right, it’s all good. But you’re at the airport stuck because something that is out of your control is not aligning with your expectations. So, when you think about it that way, what is in your control right now?
JESSICA: I guess the only thing at my control is how I want to make the decision to stay or to leave. If I stay, then I need to understand the consequence I’m going to suffer and I don’t know when the suffering will end. And so I had a lots of sleepless nights and this organization I’ve been working actually in the past 10 years I have so much good memories with that. I do believe we have good people in the organization and we can become a very effective team. But honestly speaking, I think so far I’m actually really kind of set up with everything. So, I made a call that I want to leave. So back to that. I want to leave the airports.
MURIEL WILKINS: You want to leave the airport? Okay.
JESSICA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m curious, Jessica, and correct me if I’m not using your words on point, but you said something about suffering the consequences. I’m curious why you’re associating whatever consequences you face with suffering.
JESSICA: Because I think people do not change. If we don’t change people, then the overall culture won’t change.
MURIEL WILKINS: But what is the consequence that you think you’ll face that make you think that you’ll suffer?
JESSICA: Because I want to make things work. I want to drive a result. But there’s other people who only stay there and criticize everything. I don’t think those people will eventually move. So for me, that’s suffering. So, I could influence them to be positive, and I actually don’t know how I’m able to continue to work with those individuals.
MURIEL WILKINS: I just want to say, suffering stems from the same place. Suffering stems from a place of resisting whatever is happening. And so, what’s interesting to me here is that what you’re challenged with organizationally is the resistance that these folks have to change. And yet, what is causing your suffering is the resistance to the fact that you’re dealing with people who resist. You are resisting, you’re not accepting that you’re dealing with these stakeholders and these people, these individuals, these leaders who don’t want to get on the train. I’m pointing that out because I can sense how this is impacting you from. As you said, you’ve spent nights not sleeping thinking about this. Whatever decision you make, the consequences of those decisions, the result of those decisions could end up being ones that you feel cause you suffering. Why? Because you’re resisting what led up to those consequences. Or you can experience them in a different way than suffering, which is okay, this didn’t happen. People did not buy in, they did not want to get on the train. I’m now deciding to leave. What doors does this open for me now? So, it creates more openness to what’s next rather than resistance to what’s happened already.
JESSICA: Yeah, I don’t fully understand that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
JESSICA: But I think what you’re mentioning is actually very, very key because you said that the suffering coming from resistance, and my suffering is coming from my resistance to working with people who resist for the change.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
JESSICA: Yeah. If that’s the case, should I let them continue resist and I just get along with that?
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, that’s the choice. You don’t have to. You don’t have to. You can also say, “Hey… “ Either way you accept it. Really, it’s accepting. I’m going to accept that this is the way that you are for now. Maybe you’ll never change, I don’t know, but I’m going to accept it. And all acceptance means is I see you for where you are right now, which is you don’t want to get on the train. And so now that I know that, what do I do? That’s it. That’s all acceptance means. Acceptance doesn’t mean that you agree with it, that you yourself have to also just stand there doing nothing. It’s just seeing it clearly and then deciding where do you put your leadership energy. Do you continue to put your leadership energy towards pushing something that has not been set up to be pushed? Or do you exert that energy elsewhere? It’s not passive actually. It’s what allows you to then make a choice. So, there’s a difference. It’s not, I give in and I lose what I think is important. It’s more just seeing it for what it is. All it is is that they’re not ready for the change. So now what do I do with that as Jessica? Do I wait? That’s one option. As we said with the airport, do I wait for them to become ready and try to continue doing what I’m doing? Which is, what is that going to require from you? What is that going to require from you if you decide to wait it out?
JESSICA: If I fully accept that they’re not ready for the change, then I shouldn’t push for the change and I do not looking for the results, or I do not set myself to be measured against that, so all the results.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, so that’s one, right, you cannot push. You could also push, but understand that it still might not lead to anything, which is what you’ve already done.
JESSICA: Right. That’s kind of waste of energy, which I’m working every day and I didn’t make any impact, why am I doing that?
MURIEL WILKINS: Well, the waste of energy is coming from you saying, Oh my God, I pushed again today and they didn’t move. That’s where the energy is being exerted. It’s the frustration, that’s the energy draining. It’s the expectation every day that you’re going to do this and it’s actually going to get them into that next step versus, “I tried and it didn’t happen. Okay, I try again tomorrow or I try something different.” The frustration is the energy drainer in all of this.
It was clear from the beginning that this was going to be a conversation around change management. And Jessica herself chose to start focusing on how she might change her style or approach to better influence people. But as we went on, we realized that there are some people she works with who just are not ready for the change, and that Jessica doesn’t really have the ability to make big shifts in the team without the help of senior management. That got us down the road of why she feels like she’s suffering. Sometimes in a coaching session, we do end up getting to a point where the reality is that the outcome we desire is out of reach, at least for now. But we need to explore the options to get to that point. And one new path she could go down, one new option she has is to stop resisting, which is causing her the suffering that she explained. As the saying goes, what we resist persists. Let’s rejoin the conversation now as we talk through what that change might look like in practice.
What would your attitude or your own behavior need to be for you to wait without the frustration, energy draining that is happening? What would you need to do or how would you need to be to not experience waiting with the same level of frustration that you’re feeling or the same level of suffering as you called it?
JESSICA: I don’t know, but it’s a good question, but I actually don’t know the answer. How should I behave? Not feel frustrated.
MURIEL WILKINS: So at the root of frustration is misaligned expectations.
JESSICA: So you are saying that I should really think about my expectations.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
JESSICA: That’s against my value.
MURIEL WILKINS: Mm-hmm.
JESSICA: That makes me uncomfortable because I’m one that I want to draw the results, right? So if I see now if I lower my expectation that, okay, result is not important for me, that’s not me anymore. That’s not Jessica, that’s another person.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what’s a difference… because you said lower your expectations? All I said is at the root of it as expectations, but you said that means that you would need to lower your expectations. Is there anything different that you could do with your expectations besides lowering them? Lowering them is definitely one option, but is there anything else you could do with your expectations?
JESSICA: Or change the expectation.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what would that look like? How could you change your expectations without lowering them in this scenario? We’re just playing, I’m not saying you have to. How could you change your expectations without lowering them?
JESSICA: I don’t know, Muriel. This is hard one.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, your expectations right now—you have them clearly in your head. Are they the only ones that are possible?
JESSICA: That I need to deviate, meaning that I need to think differently about my value into this whole project and to reposition myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s under the scenario of if you want to wait it out.
JESSICA: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: So what we’re really talking about Jessica is, when we’re not getting the response that we need from everyone else, then we can bang our head trying to change them, which is, I feel like what you’ve been doing. Again, that’s an option, but this is where it’s led you to. It’s led you to hear talking to—poor you—to me. The other option is say, “Okay, they are what they are. How do I need to change my response to them?” It’s interesting to me that we started out this whole conversation by you saying, What’s been really difficult about this whole transformation is, yeah, we have things at the surface level, but we haven’t really been able to change mindset.
And so, what I’m asking you—which, you don’t need to have the answer today, maybe where we’ll end up here is here are some questions you need to think about—is in what way does Jessica need to change her mindset in order to be able to continue to lead this transformation or in order to be able to complete her next year or two years in this post? Fill in the blank. And then the other option is, You know what? I’m not going to try to change them, I’m not going to try to change my mindset, I’m out, I’m just going to do a do-over, I’m just going to start anew someplace else, which has its merits. I wouldn’t try, nor is it my place, to try to convince you one way or the other.
What I will say is that given your career trajectory and given that you have some runway with your career still ahead of you and you’re already in a leadership role, this isn’t the last transformation you’re going to face. So, there’s a lot to be learned right now. So, I think maybe the place to start or restart is, at this point, what do you want to do? Like putting a stake in the ground. Do you want to stay and wait it out? Because as you said, you’ve moved, you’re here, you have family. Okay, so Muriel, I kind of want to stay. I have fond memories of this company. I’ve been here a while. I like the company. Do I want to wait it out or do I want to leave?
And then based on either of those two decisions, then going back to that question that I asked you, okay, if you want to leave, what is required of you to be able to take that path? And if you want to stay and wait, then what would be required of you? What is within your control that would enable you to stay and wait on both sides without consequences of suffering that you articulated, without the frustration? What would you need? What could you do? What mindset would you need to have? What’s possible that’s within your control that would help either of those paths be ones that you can operate with more ease? So let me pause there and see what your reaction is.
JESSICA: I mean, this question make me think a lot. I always think that I already manage to the bottom of the [inaudible 00:47:03], but when you bring this question up, this specific [inaudible 00:47:09], okay, why does Jessica need to change her mindset in order to continue leading transformation or doing something else? Actually, I never thought that I need to change my mindset, but probably I need. But the question now I have is that how am I able to find out the way to change my mindset? How am I able to identify what are the area of the mindset I need to change? And then I can think about the way to change it.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I’m even going to edit my words a little bit because I said change mindset, and I’m going to take that back. See, even as your coach I’m like, “Oh, no, that’s not what I really meant.” I’m going to say, what if it was to expand your mindset? So in what ways do you need to expand your mindset in order to be able to move through this transformation? And what you’re asking is, I don’t know. I don’t know what ways, right?
JESSICA: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s interesting to me because I think in even asking yourself that question, you’re expanding it. You’re opening yourself up to maybe there is another way. So it happens in the process. When you expand, you’re looking at other opportunities, other options. And so I think part of what you might want to take a look at is, I know you didn’t like when I brought it up before, but it’s the expectations. Do the goals need to change? Does the destination need to change? Maybe if the destination of that car, train, or plane changed, more people would get in, or you would need as many people, you wouldn’t need as much gas. I don’t know the ins and outs of your business. But one is, does the goal need to change? Does the setup need to change? Which we looked at before. These are all things on the outside. The way that you think about the project might need to expand some.
JESSICA: I think at this moment the external environment or the situation, the context that I can change is very, very minimum. So there’s many, many things. It’s out of my own control, and I fully understand that. However, if I look at this way where you say that, “Okay, how Jessica you are able to expand your mindset looking at your own course?” actually, a few months ago I start to question myself because I feel very, very bad is I failed this project.
Later on I realized that it’s not because I failed, it’s because the project itself was not set up in the right way so I cannot deliver the results. So I somehow get myself out of this critic that, okay, I fail. I mean, if I’m always that situation, then it’s really miserable things that I put in myself. So now I say, “Okay, it’s not me failing this. The question is that based on this situation, what can I do or what can I learn from that?” Because you also said that there’s going to be a lot more transformation going on in the later parts of my career, so the question is that, if this is going to be a failure, then how can I learn from this?
So I said, Okay, now I probably need to change my goal to say, Okay, now I want to observe more. I want to see how the dynamics with the organization, how people are changing their narrative, how people are changing their behaviors based on different situations and why some of leaders they do not want to make decision and why this leadership style really influenced the organization, et cetera.  So I kind of changed my goal from to manage project into, okay, how I learn from this. But in reality, whenever I have meetings, I just go back to the regional setup as, “Oh, why I do not deliver the results?” So this result-driven things that really kind of feel like built into me that I was like, I feel that so bad because I couldn’t deliver the results.
MURIEL WILKINS: Of course.
JESSICA: For example, I try this meditation, I try to do mindfulness practice. I try to do this journaling myself to really boost myself inside to have more appreciation about me, et cetera, et cetera, but it doesn’t really change that much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
JESSICA: I don’t know what’s more or-
MURIEL WILKINS: Oh, Jessica.
JESSICA: … how I can escape this trap?
MURIEL WILKINS: You can’t escape. Oh, I love it. I love what you’re saying because there is no escape. You’re in it. This is the reality of it. Okay? This is it. The fact of the matter is here I said, “Oh, you should expand your mindset.” You have. You’ve expanded it to say, “Oh, this is a situation where I want to drive to results. And that’s been my main way, drive to results, and that is Jessica. Jessica drives to results, okay?”
JESSICA: [inaudible 00:52:37].
MURIEL WILKINS: “And oh, by the way, maybe I should be looking at this as a learning thing where I’m going to observe and I have learning opportunities, and I’m going to for the time being pick up everything that I can so that I can then use it in future situations. But then I’m back in these meetings and all of a sudden I’m back to Jessica driving results.”
Those are both parts of your mindset and they’re both amazing parts that you can use. One is just a little bit more habitual than the other. But you’re not trying to get rid of it. I love the fact that you said, “I tried meditation.” Let me tell you something. As a long time meditator, I practice meditation, when it finally clicked for me, what the most valuable part…not valuable part, but where I get a lot of practice in meditation is every time I catch myself with my thoughts fleeing away, like I’m thinking about what I’m going to do next weekend and who I need to call. In the middle of my meditation, I’m sitting on my mat, I’m focusing on my breath, on the breath, on the breath, on the breath. Next thing I know, I’m thinking about what reality TV show I’m going to watch later that night.
But the difference is you can beat yourself up and say, Oh my gosh, here I am again driving for results when I told myself I wasn’t going to. Or you can say, Oh, okay, that’s just a reminder that I need to go back to the learning mindset. Thank you, drive-for-results Jessica. Thank you for that reminder. I’m going back to learning. Just like for me, when the reality TV show comes up—Oh, thank you, okay, got it, yep, let me go back to the breath. Because when you’re able to do that, that’s what it means to be mindful. It doesn’t mean that you escape, it just means that you’re aware that these things are happening.
So you are aware of your mindsets. And now the question is, okay, so with that awareness, what does it allow you to do? You have actually the capability. There you are. You’re not giving yourself credit. I just think you need to give yourself a little bit more grace. So if part of it is, huh, I can stay and I can learn, and that’s the way that I’m going to respond to this, how does that make you feel versus when you’re in this position of we need to drive to results, we need to drive to these XYZ results? How does it make you feel given what’s going on organizationally?
JESSICA: I think the learning piece is much positive because I’m always curious person. So, if I learn something, then I’ll say, “Oh, I understand that. Okay, this is the thing that I didn’t realize in the past or didn’t observe in the past,” rather than the other side is always frustrate, right? Because somehow I couldn’t really change things. So this frustration really eats me up. So I guess “be curious” is definitely much more positive. I used to be a very happy person. I’m always bring energy to others, but now I feel in those meetings I kind of been consumed with this negativity around the rooms, and I hate that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Jessica, you have articulated so well how much a lot of this transformation project is out of your control. And then what you’ve just articulated around, if I think about it this way, if I bring in this mindset, I feel a lot more positive. I’m able to feel good about myself and be more of who I typically am, a positive person. If I think about it this other way, I get frustrated. I don’t feel good about me. I’m not positive. I want to get out of here. Those things you have control over. So I think really in reality right now, it’s given what’s happening, let’s focus on the things that you have control over.
I have no skin in the game, you choose. Do you want to experience this transformation season that you’re in with frustration or do you want to experience it with more positivity? And depending which you choose, you’ve actually been able to identify in our conversation what is the mindset or the Jessica that I need to lead with in order to be able to experience it in that particular way. And it’s your choice. That’s within your choice, nobody else can choose that for you. And then obviously there’s always the option to at some point say, I know I can do those two things, but I choose not to, and I don’t want to be here. And that’s fine too.
So let’s pause because I think there’s a lot there. I know you came in with the, How do I get people to get on the car, train or a plane, all the things? Where we sort of netted out is, in order to get them on those things, a lot of it seems to be out of your control. Now, maybe there’s a part of going back and testing some of that out some more. We try to test it out within our conversation. And then it sort of led us to, oh, well, if those things are out of your control, then what is in your control? So I’d love to hear from you two things. One, what are steps that you think you can take following this coaching conversation that you think will enable you to make a decision of go or no go? And two, how are you left feeling right now versus where we started the conversation?
JESSICA: So probably let me go with the second question first. So first of all, I really thank you, Muriel for this coaching session. I think now I feel there’s much more clarity in my mind compared with when I started this conversation. Because the very initial question that I bring along is really about the so-called culture background, how this really plays along with the leadership style. But then we dive into that and we figured out, okay, for everything that I have experienced in the past, in the end, the only thing that I’m able to manage is how I’m able to react to all the change, so what I can control within myself with my capacity.
I think that’s one of the things that I think somehow I know that I wasn’t able to feel good about it. So I think with our conversation, somehow, I feel much more convinced that this is things that I have continued to work on. Going back to the first question, I think I will continue this path because I find the right or I find some alternative goals already for myself. Then the question’s that, how I’m able to make myself more aware when I turn on to be a frustrated person that I allow the others to consume my own energy. Instead of that I can really putting myself in composition that I can help others.
Because for me, my leadership or the way that I think I’m successful is that I’m able to really support other team members for success. I wasn’t able to do that in the last few months, and I feel bad about it. So if now I can be much more aware that I can always, probably, as you said, I cannot escape that, so I can put myself more into the situation that I really have the right energy level, then I try my best to push forward to my results or my goals.
MURIEL WILKINS: And that just takes practice. I mean, awareness takes practice, okay?
JESSICA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’ve already demonstrated a high level of awareness in this conversation, and so just continue practicing it, continue asking yourself, “Is this frustrated Jessica or is this the curious learning Jessica?” Neither one or bad, it’s just more who do you want to lead and who do you want to be as a leader in that moment? Okay, it’s your choice.
JESSICA: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right?
JESSICA: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Thank you so much.
JESSICA: Thank you so much for this conversation.
MURIEL WILKINS: Change management or any transformational work isn’t easy in any circumstance, whether at the organizational level or at the individual level. What I do know is that to influence transformation at the organizational level, one must often go through a process of individual transformation themselves. What started out as coaching on how Jessica could make change happen at scale required going back to what changes Jessica needed to make with herself to meet the organization where it is. And neither one of us expected the coaching to lead us to a place of mindfulness, but sometimes coaching leads you to not what you expect, but more to what you need in that particular moment.
In Jessica’s case, it was to give herself credit for what she had already worked through and to try to keep that learning mindset in addition to thinking hard about what she really wants going forward. And the lessons she learned today can apply in all kinds of other leadership situations as well. It’s about really deciding what version of yourself you need to lead with in any given situation. That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I’ve been trying for a really long time to affect change in this organization. Some things are changing. We’ve made some really important decisions to bring in people that will move us towards that culture that will support growth and achievement of our goals. And those have been hard conversations. And you come home and you’re just mentally exhausted. It’s not like I was out cutting trees down, but I’m just beat down by those conversations.
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to your favorite podcasts and subscribe to the show. And while you’re there, leave a five-star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them.
If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join me on coachingrealleaderscommunity.com, where I host exclusive live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. You can also find me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins and on Instagram at @coachmurielwilkins. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. From the HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 5: How Do I Prove I’m the Right Person for a Different Leadership Role?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call John to protect his confidentiality. He works in the marine industry as a boat captain, and it’s something he’s been passionate about for as long as he can remember.
JOHN: I started in boats when I was eight years old. I had my own boat well before I even knew how to drive a car, and it just happened. It was funny because my father was very corporate, and I always said that I would never want an office job. Don’t work on boats, you’ll never have a good living.
Some of it was rebellion, I guess, at first, saying, “I’m going to go into this industry and make it happen.” But at this point it’s all I know. I love it. I mean, it’s really hard to have a bad day when your job is riding around in the water all day. I like it that it’s different every day. I like it that it’s a challenge every day.
It doesn’t matter how capable you are, there’s elements of it that are completely out of anyone’s control. Mother nature for one, even if it’s the same, every day is different.
MURIEL WILKINS: John has moved through different parts of the industry and has proven himself as a leader on the water, but as his professional and personal aspirations have shifted, he’s moved closer to the corporate side and wants to make that transition more permanent.
JOHN: I have been bridging the gap between captain and then working in the operations area of the company, on the corporate side of things. And what I’m trying to get at is moving fully into the operations. I have made a transition that very few people are able to pull off, coming from, let’s say, the working class of the industry into the office job, and that’s where I’m struggling with getting to the next level.
MURIEL WILKINS: John has been successful in making this transition so far in part because of his ability to jump in and help fix problems. He’s become someone a lot of the management team calls on in a pinch, but he’s struggling to make sure that translates into long-term, full-time value and the permanent role. I started the conversation by asking him why he thinks he has become someone that people can call on.
JOHN: Part of it is my personal want for more. Sometimes I just inject myself where I want to go and just say, “Hey, I want to be here so I’m going to tag along and learn and do it to the best of my ability until you think that I’m worthy of being brought along.” So, I did some of that, which was just inserting myself wherever I could.
There’s a split reputation, which is always the guy that gets it done, the guy that you can count on. I think the negative part of that, which is affecting me now with this transition is that I always get it done. There may be some friction there in terms of I’m plowing ahead, because I want to get somewhere, and for me to get where I want to go, the task at hand needs to be done.
I think that that comes from my early experience in the industry, in the career, where it’s tough being a captain because no one else is watching you manage. You’re on the boat, your job is the boss. Everyone understands that there is no negotiation. You can’t go about it like I’m the king. That’s not what I’m saying.
But at the same time, there’s a very clear, “This is what the expectations are and this is what’s going to happen.” So, I bring some of that with me while trying to get into the new space, and I think it’s ruffled a few feathers in the completely corporate world.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alright, so tell me a little bit about this. You’re now wanting more on the corporate side?
JOHN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is the more, what is it that you’re trying to accomplish? If 12 months from now, we talked and you said, “Mission accomplished,” what would that be? What is it that would be different?
JOHN: That would be the, I guess, creation of a position for me, and the validation that I am there on the operation side of things. Because right now I’m asked to help on the corporate level and then I go in there to maybe straighten something out or just some lessons.
The people that I’m tasked with going to assist, let’s say, once they figure out what’s happening, you’re like, “Who is this guy and why is he helping me?” Because I’m a manager at this level and this is just John, and John’s title is John.
MURIEL WILKINS: Gotcha.
JOHN: The fixer. That’s been difficult and that’s also caused a little, I think, of the reputation of me coming in with, I don’t want to say friction, not yelling and screaming, but there’s a certain amount of I need to prove what I’m doing there every time, because there’s an awful lot of people that don’t understand why I’m doing what I’m doing.
MURIEL WILKINS:
So, what I’m hearing is you are being placed in a position to make some changes, fix some things?
JOHN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And when you’re coming in, the people who are going to be impacted are like, “Why is he here?” Because they don’t know who you are or because you don’t have the title or both?
JOHN: It’s not so much as a, Why is he here? They understand that what I’m there to fix are said issues at hand. It’s not, Why am I there? It’s, Why am I the person that’s there? If that helps delineate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why is he the person that’s there? And so, as a result of that, you then feel like you have to prove that you should be the person that’s there, and then what happens?
JOHN: I mean nothing. Then we just get to work about whatever the task at hand is. It’s just a very odd dynamic.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what you would like, and correct me if I’m wrong here, what you would like is you walk in and they’re like, “Oh, it’s John.”
JOHN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s get on with it.
JOHN: I think there’s a lot of unnecessary explaining every time that needs to happen about experience, qualifications, trust and expectations. I’m at that position where I feel I really need to drive it home or I’m not sure where the future leads with this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alright. So, if you need to drive it home, who do you need to drive it home with?
JOHN: The people that question while I’m there, there’s never been a problem. After we work together, after there’s some training, it’s all good. After the initial, “This is what we’re doing. You came from the corporate space, I came from more of the industry space. So, we need to talk, we need to combine, and then that’s how we can move forward here to help you.”
Because these people are doing something that is not operations, it’s just a more micro thing. Nobody complains, there’s no issues. But from the complete corporate side, they have their checklist and business degree. No. Formal education other than Maritime College? No.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what have they said to you? What conversations have ensued?
JOHN: And that I think is why I’m also seeking your expertise, is getting those conversations to happen. There has been no conversations that say no, but no one really gets down to the nitty-gritty of the conversation, and I’m trying to nudge that along to make that happen.
That’s where it’s a little difficult because I get sent out to work in the field of different things and then they’re all in the office and then I come back and it’s just, it’s a leave and come back. There’s not a constant relationship there with the people that I feel have a say in me moving up.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alright. So, if you were, let’s imagine that you can get the conversation to the nitty-gritty that you want it to get to. What would that look like?
JOHN: Clearer expectations of the role and/or role being created, I’m not so much worried about compensation and things like that. I mean, obviously that’s part of it, but it’s I’m doing two jobs, completely different. They don’t overlap, and it’s just an odd mix on all sides.
When I flip into the operations role, usually it’s assisting new people coming into the company from a different side of the industry. So, their expectations are unclear and perhaps their knowledge base is not… We’re not on the same level about the same things. I’m trying to figure out how to word it, is that they expect me to do what I do, which is why I get sent to do it. But at the end of the day, there is no sheet that says, “This is what you’re doing.”
MURIEL WILKINS: What do you think is getting in the way of it being on a sheet that says, “This is part of your job description.”?
JOHN: I think that my little position is probably not the highest priority right now. There’s massive changes going on, which I understand that, which is why I’ve tried to be patient with this. But again, going back to watching what’s going on, I feel I need to make it stick.
It’s not a personal problem and it’s not even a business problem, it’s just they don’t come from the industry. They’re learning and the whole thing is so foreign and so unique that I’m not sure that anyone knows how to start and wrap their head around it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alright. Let’s talk about the supporters that you have, because it sounds like you do have some folks who are very positive on you and support you.
JOHN: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: What conversations have you had with them about all this?
JOHN: One I’m very close with. We’ve had conversations. He’s helped me quite a bit in terms of getting here and seeing my desire to get here, as well as the other supporter. They see it. I have a desire to get here. I do what I can. I learn a lot. Anywhere that I can soak up knowledge to better myself and get somewhere, I do.
We spoke earlier in this about, I like the industry, because it’s a different challenge every day. I mean, I’m a person that gets up every day and goes, what’s today’s challenge? Whatever it is, I want one. Even if it’s a little one and I want to get through it and be higher on the other side. So, they both see that.
They’ve helped me a lot. They have to protect themselves as well, so they can only go so far. And I understand that. What I’m trying to get is I just need my foot in the next door just a little bit.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the next door, what is the next door for you?
JOHN: Creating this little operations assistant position and being on the road there.
MURIEL WILKINS: And have you made that specific ask?
JOHN: Yes. I’ve done a couple courses with that. The company has paid for me to do some training. They are doing everything that they can, and we’re just going to the corporate side of things and trying to say, “Listen, here’s everything that we’ve done. Here’s all the education, here’s all the skills, here’s all the history. Let’s create a role here.” And we never get no, but we don’t get yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you don’t get no, you don’t get yes. You’re in limbo. You have these folks who support you. They also agree with you that a role could be carved out for you. It’s taken to corporate, they take it to corporate or you take it to corporate?
JOHN: They have.
MURIEL WILKINS: They take it to corporate. The response is not a no, it’s not a yes. I feel like we’re doing, what was it, the three bears?
JOHN: Something like that.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s not hot, it’s not cold, whatever. Something like that. So, what is the response?
JOHN: I mean, the reality of it is there is no actual response. There’s another fire maybe with something else that gets attended to and then it gets circled back, and there’s a lot going on and there’s some bigger fires that have been put out. Where I am is, “You’ve put me through this training, I’ve showed my desire to do it. Let’s get there. Let’s make it a priority.”
MURIEL WILKINS: So, what is stopping you from saying exactly what you just said to me to the folks that in corporate? I know you don’t have as much of a deep relationship with them as you do with these other individuals, but what has stopped you from having that direct conversation with them?
JOHN: The fact that we don’t really have a chance to have direct communication unless it’s about an issue at hand. There’s not really room for, shall I say, free speech. It’s, “This is what you’re up to. How are we resolving this? This is what we need you to be up to. Have a good day.”
Trying to get somebody’s ear long enough has been tough, and then when I do, it gets put back down a level to my people and then my people bring it up again and then it’s this cycle that has been going on. Then I’ll do more training. I’ll do more courses. Great.
Then there’s been a lot of turnover at that corporate level. So, that’s also been a little bit of a hindrance, because there’s a learning curve, let’s face it, of a year or so before anybody’s really comfortable in what they’re doing. So, we’ve gone through that with upper management changes.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, you’re saying that if you were to, I’m a tactical type of person, you’re saying if you try to get on the calendar for one of these folks up in corporate and you just, whoever you need to contact to get 30 minutes on their calendar, they wouldn’t take the meeting?
JOHN: They would say, “Well, you have to go through your manager to get to us,” which has been done. Part of the need of trying to prove that I fit in is I really don’t want to step on anybody’s toes and I don’t want to seem too pushy, and I don’t consider myself a timid person to how I’ve got here. But now that I have something that is to me delicate that I really want, I’m almost at the point where I just want to take it real easy. I don’t want to be seen as coming in charging, saying, “Give me, give me.”
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand, and so there’s a part of you want an answer and the part of you who wants the answer is, “Come on already, let’s get to it. Let’s have the conversation. Let’s put it down on paper, let’s make it happen.” And then there’s the other side of you that’s like, “Hey, there’s a lot going on. You don’t want to ruffle any feathers because if you ruffle any feathers, it can end up not being the response that you want.”
I think you need to think about what do you feel most comfortable with doing because you’re seeing the potential impact of both, and neither one is giving you the actual result that you want today. But which one do you feel you could live with the most at this point?
JOHN: I suppose I like to say rip the Bandaid off and just get the answer. I’m at the point of my career where I’d like to make something happen. I’ve now done this transition twice in two different careers. So, I know that if I push too hard for the answer with what’s happening with the industry right now, I don’t think I’ll be out of a job at all. But I don’t know what the job will be. So, I didn’t answer your question. That was the same answer as I’m afraid to know the answer, but I want it tomorrow.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I mean, that’s the trade-off. I can’t give you an answer around that, but that’s the trade-off. The trade-off is do you push hard today for an answer knowing that it might not be the answer that you want, or do you let it play out? Also knowing that it might not be the answer you want. It could be. It could not be. I mean, so at the end of the day, there’s uncertainty here.
When John and I started the coaching session, his challenge seemed relatively straightforward. He was looking to find a permanent position in a different kind of role at his organization than what he’d previously done. He wanted to know how to face the headwinds.
But just because a problem is straightforward doesn’t make it simple, because in the case of a promotion or job change, it isn’t always just about you and the work you put in. It’s also about the preconceived notions or past experiences you bring with you and the preconceived notions others have about you.
I wanted to get some basic ground covered with John first, why he wanted this job, what he had done in similar roles so far, and perhaps most importantly, what if anything, he had concretely done to get this new permanent role created. And as I started getting those details, we started to scratch the surface of something deeper, why he felt it was time in his career for this kind of move.
We’ll dive into this more as the session goes on, but first I wanted to help him think about similar experiences he’s had in the past when he faced uncertainties. When you’ve had to make these types of choices before where it’s go now or wait and let it play out, how have you made those decisions?
JOHN: Always pushed, always gone now, and that comes back to the conversation we’ve had a little earlier, is I think one reputation that is detracting a little bit is being a hard charger. And I think that every company needs the people that get it done, but then we also get labeled as not team players, I guess.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, do you think that’s detracting from you getting the answer or?
JOHN: I think that’s my biggest detractor for the whole thing, because I don’t think that the people that are probably not on my team, I mean, when I say they’re not on my team, no one has said no. There’s never been any issue. But we all work in companies, we all know conversations happen.
I think that’s the conversation that I’ve been trying so hard to prove because I’ve taken all the courses, I’ve done all this thing, done schoolwork, and that’s where we are is I’m just trying really hard to show I understand what your concerns are, folks. I’ve heard them and look at me playing nice.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, I hear you around the trying hard to make it happen. And part of what I really appreciated around when I asked you what do you love about your career or even getting into this space, getting into working in maritime, as you said, “I love the fact that every day I wake up and it’s a challenge and I’m dealing with things like Mother Nature that are out of your control.” So, what I’m hearing is there’s a lot here that’s out of your control.
JOHN: Yes, and where it is it’s coming from a confidence of the things that I deal with out of my control from the maritime space I know how to deal with and the sales side of the company. Those are things that when I started doing this, I was just faking it until I made it with my direct supervisor, and he gave me as much knowledge as he could.
But let’s face it, and as I said to you, this is a little outside of the normal wheelhouse because I don’t have a business education, and I’m getting deeply into the business side of the company, and there’s definitely times at the conference table where I feel like I’m in elementary school, don’t let the teacher call on me.
Go home, do all my research, learn it, and I have, and know enough to talk the talk, but I don’t want to be seen through. I don’t feel like I’m faking it. I don’t feel like I don’t belong at all, and no one has ever said that, but certainly I am aware of areas I could learn in.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re a learner and that’s okay. I think the question is do they feel is the expectation that you need to know more on the business side in order to have an official title in that capacity? But I think there’s a couple of things here, because on the one hand, there are things that are happening at the macro level. They are out of your control. That’s happening whether you’re there or you’re not there. It’s the Mother Nature of your company right now.
Then there are the things that are within your control, which I’m hearing as what are the capabilities that I need to build up as somebody credible in this role, just in terms of background and knowledge? How do I make sure that my behavior is aligned with being seen as a team player and a collaborator? And if that’s the expectation, one that doesn’t alienate folks.
And then what is also in your control, the third piece that’s in your control, is how hard do I push for clarity of this role given everything going on? So, those are the three things that I hear. The number one around the gaining the knowledge, it sounds like you’re working on. You’re taking classes, you’re going home and doing the research, etc., check done. You’re working on that.
There’s the second piece around what are you doing relative to this potential reputation that you said you have that is also possibly contributing to being a detractor from you getting the role that you want. So, on the behavioral side, meaning how you deal with people and showing up more as a team player, more collaborator, what are you doing on that end?
JOHN: This sounds so cliche, but engage your brain before speaking, thinking hard about how my view of the situation from the industry side and then putting on top of it the corporate side and what the company and the restructuring is trying to get and saying, how can I meld the two thoughts for pertinent information only?
No one has ever said, “You don’t know what you’re talking about.” But I think people have said, “Well, that doesn’t matter.” And to me, getting bogged down in the micro comes across sometimes as not a team player, because we’re not talking about the micro at the operations level. We are to some extent, but it’s a more general idea.
So that’s one thing I’ve been working on is not trying to bog down in details that are not necessarily need to be at the table. If I have a solution trying to, “How can we do this? What about this?” And not trying to be like, “Well, I don’t know what people don’t see.” And I know that that’s a weak point of mine.
I fully admit it, and that’s why this transition, I do feel a little on eggshells. So, certainly been trying there, emailing everyone that should be emailed, not going around people. I mean, all the basic stuff that we do, it’s been a learning curve there, but just trying really hard to think about how can we involve people to all come to solution that we need to at all levels.
I’ve always of the mind when I was just a captain, everybody needs to be on board with what’s happening, may not agree with it, but everybody needs to know what’s going on. And I think that there was a part of me when I first got into this role and was learning it that just didn’t involve the people that didn’t want to play along, whether they could contribute or not. In that particular instance, everyone needs to be involved, so that’s been a little bit of a curve there.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, that’s been a focus for you, and you’re working that piece of it. So, that means category number two, let me make sure I’m being a team player, is work in progress, but you’re not ignoring it and you’re working towards it.
JOHN: And as of recent, there’s never been a comment about that. There certainly was much earlier on in this process, which is why I’m very sensitive to that, but there’s been no problems there. It’s just something that I know that I need to work extra hard on, and it’s also bogging me down at the same time, because I feel that I focus almost too much on that to where I lose a little bit of myself in the let’s make a plan and get after it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, may I suggest in that area that you’re not necessarily losing a bit of yourself. You’re using one of the muscles that you have less, well…countering that with another muscle that you’re building.
JOHN: I suppose. I get that. I get it. I completely understand that.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, look, I think you’re sort of saying, “Hey, in order for me to have X, Y, Z position, I need to be able to do it in a more collaborative way or including more people.”
JOHN: Yes, yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Does that mean that you’re losing a part of yourself? No, because that “get it done” piece of you is still there. It’s not like you’re kicking it to the curb and saying, “Never, ever show up again.” You’re just saying, “In this particular situation, that’s not what’s going to help me get to my goal.” So, which one is it? Is it that you just want to keep doing things the way you have been doing them or do you want to do things that are going to get you closer to your goal?
JOHN: I have learned that getting it done on Wednesday sometimes is better than getting it done on Tuesday if everyone agrees.
MURIEL WILKINS: Exactly, and that’s the situation, I mean, I think that’s the issue with this whole, “What’s next? What’s the role? Let’s make it clear.” Having the answer today, it sounds like, would make you a heck of a lot more comfortable because it provides you with the security that you know it’s your role and you can, as you said, show up and have that credibility, etc.
But I don’t have clarity around how it would benefit everyone else, the decision makers, how would it benefit them to have clarity on your role today? How would that benefit them in any way?
JOHN: I feel that it would benefit them because they then know that they have a person in that role which they can utilize without the added layer of, “Oh, John has that ability, send him.”
MURIEL WILKINS: But they already have you in the role?
JOHN: Well, they do, but the people that support me, I feel, always remind the folks that necessarily don’t, “Send John.” So, I feel like if the role is there, then everyone’s in agreement that it’s been earned, which I’ve tried to do to the best of my ability at a point in my career where I feel it’s a pivotal time to make the move.
But trying to figure out how to word this here. If I’m in the position that’s been created with rules and regulations and expectations, then that’s my role and I can be utilized in it.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, here’s the thing. I think that this is an exercise in getting people to see things the way that you’re seeing it. What’s unclear to me is, as I mentioned before, do they see the benefit of having that level of expectation? Because guess what? Regardless of whether they’ve given you the title or not, minus that little extra step of, “Send John,” you’re doing it, you’re fulfilling the role.
JOHN: Well, right, and I think also what would benefit them is, and this goes back to the start of the conversation, when I go and the people that I’m working with don’t necessarily understand my role, because there is no role. There’s a lot of back and forth that has to go back up to them that tells the person, “Yes, we’ve decided that John is the guy for this.” I feel that could be a little benefit to them, because there’s an awful lot of time wasted.
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand that. I think I’m asking is that a real pain point for them? Does it matter? Because if it doesn’t matter, there’s not going to be any urgency to make that decision today.
JOHN: I don’t think it’s a pain point, they just have to deal with it. I mean, every time I get sent somewhere, there’s probably two days worth of emails that go back and forth about it before I can implement anything, so if they’re fine with that.
MURIEL WILKINS: What would create the sense of urgency that would make them come to a decision of whether there should be clarity or not or whether you have the role or not on Tuesday versus Wednesday, as you put it?
JOHN: I don’t know, to be honest with you. A lot of people are filling roles that are gray area, and I feel that that’s bogging down the entire process, because I think there’s probably a lot of people in my position. I think there’s a lot of gray area, all the way up and down, and it’s just bogging down a lot of things.
MURIEL WILKINS: Alright, so let’s go back to the choices. The choices, do you push today or do you wait it out, keep doing what you’re doing, even though there’s some discomfort with it, keep doing what you’re doing, and wait it out til there’s a little less uncertainty organizationally, and then you make your move. We’ve been talking a lot about what it looks like if you push today. What would it mean to you if you waited it out?
JOHN: I mean, the self-satisfaction of knowing that I made it would be nice, but that’s not really not a factor in company. But just knowing that everything I’ve done and tried to accomplish and have been able to accomplish for someone who really on paper probably shouldn’t have been able to get there, that would be good. I will continue to do what I do because that’s just who I am. I will always do what I am expecting to do to the best of my ability, but with a little bit of a push along the way, I’m sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean I feel like either way, you’re going to keep doing what you’re doing, it sounds like.
JOHN: But with all the uncertainty and everything, I don’t want to keep doing what I’m doing until there’s no opportunity to do it anymore, is where I’m at. I don’t feel that if I don’t secure this position, there’s no upward mobility. If this doesn’t happen, I will be at this level for the foreseeable future.
MURIEL WILKINS: Got it. What I wanted to double click on is whether you are going through some of the basics of what it means to try to secure a position. From what I’m hearing from you, it sounds like you are. I think the question is how much pressure can you put on the people who do support you to get some clarity?
If you don’t have access to that upper management, which is what you’re telling me is that you don’t have access to them, then somebody else needs to be speaking on your behalf. So, are they putting the type of pressure that you think is warranted?
JOHN: Well, I think there’s a certain kind of apathy for it. “Well, it doesn’t matter, John, because we’re going to get you there and then there’s going to be a change and a restructure and a new person, and you’re still going to be doing what you’re doing and we’re going to have to relearn the system.”
So, they have put the pressure on, and some of that is also to your point about when do I need the answer. I supposed at the end of the day, it doesn’t matter. If I got the answer tomorrow, then things could change the next day, and all it is, is a different business card, really.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, you want an answer, which I get. I’m not trying to dismiss that. You’re not sure if you’re going to get the answer that you want, whether that’s today or tomorrow. You don’t know if you’re going to get any answer at all, because that’s what’s been happening. I’m a little curious around what’s the consequence of you not getting an answer? If you never get an answer, what are you going to do?
JOHN: I would keep doing this right now and perhaps start to pursue other opportunities, but the problem with that is getting to this particular transition level would be extremely difficult if I was to start over. I don’t know that that would be warranted, and I don’t want to make that move.
MURIEL WILKINS: So, there’s a bit of a, man, this is what’s coming up for me. My mom, when she was alive, one of her favorite things to do is she’d go to church. But then after church, she would go to the casino and play the slots.
JOHN: Sounds like my kind of Sunday.
MURIEL WILKINS: And I used to be like, “Mom,” I would just wait for her outside, it’s not my thing. And I used to be like, “How long are you staying?” She’s like, “Well, if I leave now, I’m either leaving with nothing because I haven’t lost, I’ve netted out zero, or I’m leaving with whatever – the $25,” that she had won at that point. “But if I stay, maybe there’s the possibility that I’m going to get more. And so, what do I do?”
And I’m not comparing your career literally to playing the slots. It’s not that unpredictable, but there’s a bit of hedging that you’re doing. And in those situations, there’s really no right answer. It’s not that black and white. There’s more of which one do I feel provides me with what I want the most at this point?
Maybe you then give yourself a deadline or a milestone and say, “If I don’t have an answer, if I don’t have clarity by X period of time, then I have to make a decision then. Do I start looking elsewhere, knowing that I wouldn’t be starting at the level that I’m at now? I’d be starting a little bit over again, or do I continue to stay?” It’s always a trade-off.
I think right now, because there isn’t clarity, you’re not getting that clarity from above. Only you can answer for yourself which one feels the most right for you at this moment.
JOHN: This is why I buy scratch-off tickets. You just know then and there, scratch the ticket. You’re right, and if the industry wasn’t in such flux, the whole industry, I don’t think there’d be as much pressure to try to nail this down. Industry-wide, not company-wide at this point. That’s just an added pressure at this point.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, again, I think you’re dealing with a lot of uncertainty, and I hear you around wanting to nail it down and you wisely said, “Even if I nail it down, doesn’t mean that it’s going to be nailed down tomorrow.” So, if we pull back bigger picture, I think what you’re looking for is some sense of stability and security in the larger context of a lot of flux and change.
Where you’re looking, you’re looking for this job clarity piece that anchor, but it’s saying, “I ain’t it. I’m not the anchor right now.” So, to me, John, there’s a little bit of are there other areas that you could look for that gives you some form of stability while you wait for the clarification of expectations?
Or it’s not even wait, because I don’t think you’re being passive. We wouldn’t be having this conversation if you were being passive, but while you continue to do the work to get clarity, so that’s a question to you. What do you think you can anchor in to give you the wherewithal to continue to do the work that you have been doing to get clarity?
JOHN: I mean, in the company, I always make a point now of the people that, I don’t want to say doubters, but that needed clarification of why I was there in the first place. Once we get past that, I always make it a point to reach out and keep good relationships. Almost, they’re not enemies, but keep your enemies closer kind of thing.
That has served me well because being able to convert people, and convert’s the wrong word, I make it like it’s an us-versus-them thing. It wasn’t. No one’s against me, but some of the doubters I have definitely been able to nudge in my favor. So, that gives me a lot of purpose in terms of just keep doing what I’m doing, prove it, show it.
Something good has to come of that, is the way that I feel about it. But then I’m also seeing, not necessarily in this world. We all have uncertainty, but trying to get into the corporate space is a little more certainty than just in this industry than one level down.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I get it, and I wish I could tell you, “Here’s the 1, 2, 3 that’s going to get you a 100% guaranteed corporate security.” But heck, corporate security is not, there is no such thing. It might be more secure than the world that you were in before, for sure, relatively in terms of job security maybe, or just however you want to define security. But there is no guarantee.
JOHN: I always feel like if I got to the next point, if for whatever reason that didn’t work out, at least getting to that point would give you a leg up on starting higher or elsewhere.
MURIEL WILKINS: Great. So, let’s keep that, and that’s one story. Alright, that’s one trajectory that you could be in. If you get there, it’ll give you a leg up. That’s a possibility. That’s the potential book that you’ll write. There might also be, because this is the future, we don’t know exactly what’s going to happen.
Even if you take all these steps that you’re taking, the other story might be, “Hey, John, you did all these things. You checked all the boxes, and because of all this gray area, because of things being so in flux, it didn’t work out that way. You didn’t get that role that you had been eyeing.” So, how do you finish that story?
JOHN: How do I finish that story?
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s up to you. Does it necessarily mean you don’t have a leg up? I mean, that’s one way to end it. But is there a way of ending that story where you still can pursue whatever goals you have?
JOHN: I mean, if you just keep going along, if I just keep going along my merry way here, doing what I’ve been doing, and don’t get there, I mean, it’s still the same thing at the end of the day, I suppose.
MURIEL WILKINS: I know it might not be the book that you want to write.
JOHN: It’s not even about the title in terms of having “the title.” It’s about the recognition for the efforts, where I’m trying to go and the ability to say, “Here we are,” respected seat at the table.
MURIEL WILKINS: Before we can really start crafting an action plan. We have to really understand what the goal is and what might be holding someone back from that goal. And more importantly, what is and isn’t in our control.
In this conversation, we headed down the path of what if a bit to really face his uncertainty, even embrace it, because as much as John wants to reach his goal, the reality is that like the weather, we can’t always control what our boss or our industry or our economy is doing.
Taking a step back and getting perspective can actually help us gain confidence. We can’t predict the future, but we can control what’s in our control in the present. With that in mind, let’s see where John wants to take it from here.
So, do the efforts mean anything if you don’t get the seat at the table?
JOHN: Yes, because if it wasn’t for the efforts, I wouldn’t even have the chance. This chance does not exist elsewhere in the world. If we really zoom in right now to how I’ve come up and what I’m doing, making the transition, commercial, commercial corporate, recreational, recreational corporate, not a lot of that. It’s not a big industry. So, the efforts do mean something. I mean, there’s enough people that have seen it happen that getting here is almost just as good as finishing here.
MURIEL WILKINS: But it would be nice to also get the seat at the table.
JOHN: But I don’t want to be finished here.
MURIEL WILKINS: I understand, and so I think though what we’re doing is opening the aperture to say, the end all is not getting the seat at the table. It would be nice. I want that for you. You want that for you, and recognize that it may happen, it may not happen. Or even third, it may not happen on your time, because that time piece is the part that’s not in your control.
So, then knowing all of that, it is a decision around do I push for it to try to make it happen right now, knowing that it doesn’t look like people are really willing to make that decision? Or do I continue to put in the effort, continue to have the conversations, continue to express my interest in this, continue to try to get closer to whoever the decision makers are, continue to try to schedule time with them?
No matter how many times they say, “Talk to your manager, talk to your manager.” Bring the managers along with me, schedule time for all of us to sit and talk until I get to a point where I’m like, you know what? The effort’s not worth it to me anymore, which maybe you’ll never get to.
JOHN: It goes back to the challenge we talked about. I got to probably where I am faster than most at an age younger than most. Every time I’ve always gone from more, I’ve gotten more. And now that I can’t have it, it’s not that I can’t have it, it just hasn’t happened.
MURIEL WILKINS: It just hasn’t happened on your time. That’s, I think, what the… And for somebody who is, “Let’s just get it done now.”
JOHN: Yesterday, actually. Yesterday would be great.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yesterday. That can be hard, but sometimes just because you want to get something done, as you said before, if nobody else is wanting to get it done, unless you can create a reason for them to get it done now, that’s why I was asking, what creates the urgency for them?
JOHN: I wrote that down. That’s sitting with me about coming up with how does this benefit you reasons.
MURIEL WILKINS: I mean, I think you have to meet them where they are. You are proposing a change, and in order to get a change through, you have to frame it from a place of how is the change going to benefit these other folks who are decision makers? Not only are you proposing a change, you’re proposing it as an urgent change.
And urgent meaning, “Hey, out of all this stuff that’s happening right now, I would like this for you to be paying attention to this,” which means it needs to be higher on the priority list. Well, how do you make things higher on the priority list? You have to give them a reason for it to be important to them.
JOHN: Yeah, a 100%. Because the way I’ve been looking at it, which you’ve given me the light to today is, “You brought me over here, you let me do this role, so you guys must see something.” I’ve been looking at it too much that way of, “You let me do it,” I need to change my way of thinking about it a little bit to, “What can I do for you?” Instead of, “Look, what I’ve done for you.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes.
JOHN: I don’t know. It made sense to me.
MURIEL WILKINS: Absolutely. I think that your success has been around people calling you in. You’ve been in demand. When I asked you like, “Oh, well, why are you the guy who gets called in?” You were like, “Oh, just because I get it done, so I get the phone call, I get the phone call.” But now you’re the one having to make the phone call. Nobody’s calling, not nobody. You know what I’m saying.
JOHN: I know what you mean.
MURIEL WILKINS: They’re not calling,
JOHN: And I’m just a results person. So, the whole, in my mind, “Look what I’ve done,” equals, “What can I do for you?” But that’s not necessarily the case. You need to differentiate that.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s not necessarily the case exactly. So, I think that’s your homework, and I don’t know these folks, so I can’t tell you, “Oh, let me lay out for you what’s important to them.”
I will tell you that when you’re operating at a more senior level, and you are operating or leading or managing or restructuring or a change in the company, framing any opportunity to them in a way where they understand what would be lost if you weren’t the one in that role, from the perspective that they sit at, how do you make the restructuring easier for them? How do you make the issues that they’re dealing with?
So, that’s the homework you need to have. What’s keeping them up at night? And how does you being in this particular role help them get a little more sleep? That’s the question.
JOHN: Yes, it is.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, do you have a sense of how you might be able to get a little bit more information as to how to answer that question?
JOHN: Yeah. Again, I think if I talk to my direct supervisor, we could break out a little more what I take off his plate. So, what he’s able to do more and get that up to them.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yes. So, without knowing the details, something you might want to look into is, how do you create a proposal for your role. And maybe you provide different options. Here are the three different options of how John can play a role. But show how it fits with this new plan that they’ve articulated and how it will help make that plan succeed.
I think there’s a little bit of making sure that this conversation that you’re having about your career internally and your role is not separate, divorced from what’s happening, bigger picture. Because then it feels like just an aside rather than being critical to what’s happening overall, continuing to put it down, for you to put it down on paper and then use the people, your manager, etc., to try to get it to the folks more senior. Better yet, if there could be a meeting where it’s all of you together, it would give you a chance to present, to pitch yourself.
JOHN: We obviously have many meetings when we’re all together. It’s just always the agenda. So, I need, as you’re saying, put myself on the agenda.
MURIEL WILKINS: You need to put yourself on the agenda. You need to put yourself on the agenda. I mean, to me, the big thing, as you said, “I’m doing great work.” Your mindset has been, “I’m doing great work. They should want me to be in this.”
And that’s what’s worked for you in the past, you’ve been in demand, and now it’s like, “I need to kind of advocate for myself. I need to present it, and all I can do is put the best effort forward to present myself, hoping, how do I increase the chances that they notice and they say yes, but knowing that that’s not a guarantee. “And if it’s not a guarantee, then here’s what I know what I’m going to do.”
JOHN: Exactly.
MURIEL WILKINS: I would love to hear how you’re feeling now versus at the beginning of our conversation and where you’ve gained clarity.
JOHN: Definitely gained clarity in how to present it to the upper management and corporate about what can I do for you? How can me doing that for you affect the big picture, and focus less on, “This is what I have been doing, this is how I’ve been doing it,” which is why I’m allowed a seat at the table in the first place.
That’s been my mindset, which has been, I’ve gotten here based on my merits, and I’m here, but what are we doing? So, now I need to bring it to, I’m here. If I stay here, this is how I can help. You’ve allowed me here because of these reasons, and it’s because of these reasons that I can continue to do these things for you,” and to push and to not be afraid to do a little proposal. I got to the point of where I wanted to be, and then I got gun shy about it going south.
MURIEL WILKINS: And either way, you’ll be able to handle it, because you’ve handled it before, and it turned out pretty good because look at where you are now.
JOHN: Thank you, and again, thanks for taking me. I appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: No matter what the issue, when I coach a client, my goal is not to lead anyone down one path or another. It’s really about guiding them to see and define the trade-offs they face. In John’s case, it’s weighing the trade-offs of whether he should keep pushing for the role he wants or wait it out a bit longer, and then help them start working through where each path might lead, and discerning whether either direction gets them closer to where they really want to go.
An important takeaway for John, and many others striving for their next role, is also to step out of what you want a bit and really think about how your ask might be made more relevant for the decision makers above them, that can help you start building a different kind of action plan and take new steps to get you closer to your goal than you’ve been before.
That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
. Next time…
NEXT EPISODE’S GUEST: I start my new job in a few days, and as I look ahead, I am asking myself the question, how do you stay out of burnout this time?
MURIEL WILKINS: I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on Coaching Real Leaders, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple Spotify or wherever you listen to subscribe to the show and leave a five star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them.
If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions, become a member at CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys.
If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at CoachingRealLeaders.com from HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Do I Position Myself to Influence Senior Leadership?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I’m MURIEL WILKINS, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR Podcast Network. I’m a longtime executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Braeden to protect his confidentiality. Like many leaders, he’s landed in his current position through a bit of a winding path, starting in the tech sector, then going out on his own and then taking another turn into his current strategic leadership role.
BRAEDEN: I ended up doing some work on contract for a client, and we went from having a very transactional relationship to one where I was invited to actually be working with their owners, executives, leaders, all the way down at more of a strategic level, trying to understand how things that I could deploy might help them strategically, competitively. My role has continued to expand into that strategic level, and my job title changed as a result of that. And my day-to-day now is a weird mix of things that take you all the way from that 30,000-foot strategic level advising, counseling, coaching, our ownership, executive level, senior leadership on strategic decisions, managing what we would call our strategic plan, which is a living and breathing document, a set of commitments that we’ve made and a system whereby we can track our progress toward those commitments. But also I’ve carried all of that IT stuff with me.
MURIEL WILKINS: In making the leap from solopreneur back into the corporate world, Braeden was motivated by a few things.
BRAEDEN: I really felt a sense of ownership over what we had built. We’ve done some things that no other organization in our field is doing, and that’s really exciting. I do feel like that’s my baby, some of these systems that we’re running. And I like to problem-solve and I saw that this was an opportunity to continue solving problems in perpetuity. The second part of that is I really liked the team that I was working with—the owners, the executives, they were good people. An adjective that could be used to describe them is visionary. They have a clear concept of where they want to go. I’m on board with that concept, and I think that that was also attractive to me to be able to pivot and not lose everything that I had been doing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Braeden has now been in that current role for a few years, so we started the conversation by looking at how it’s been going so far. How much has reality matched up with his expectations?
BRAEDEN: I think with everything there’s been good and there’s been bad. I have been able to continue to solve problems, and that is certainly part of what gets me out of bed in the morning is I have a problem. I’m going to break that apart. I’m going to just destroy that problem. I’m going to conquer it and I’m going to deliver a solution. I love to say yes when it comes to IT things because I think that there’s always a way to get from where you are to where you want to be.
And I think I’m also excited… and this is something I’ve learned about myself over the last few years—is I’m excited about solving those larger business problems as well, even outside the scope of IT. So when it comes to developing a new line of business or evaluating a business and looking for gaps, is there a cohesive strategy? Is it well communicated? Is it translated into goals, objectives, tactics, KPIs, metrics, policies, processes, procedures, all the way down to the end behaviors that you want to see demonstrated that will help the organization achieve whatever its long-term goals are? That problem solving is also really enjoyable to me.
The downside I think to all of it is that where I think the organization, the owners, the executives in particular are certainly verbally on board with the long-term plans that we collaboratively set out. It has been really hard to get real movement towards those long-term goals. And that’s financial goals, revenue, profitability, but also some of the feel-good goals, the social or the community improvement that we feel like we can affect, cultural.
I’m not exactly sure where I got my expectations for culture from, but it has become more and more evident as time has passed that this organization’s culture, I think there’s a significant gap between the culture that the owners want or feel that they need and what they are able to do in terms of culture change on their own and where the rest of the organization is. I think the best way that I’ve ever heard it put is that this organization is really in its teenage years and there’s a lot of rough edges and there’s a lot of feelings and there’s conflict. I mean, not that conflict is bad in and of itself, but there’s unproductive conflict, there’s unproductive a lot of things, and that in and of itself is a huge obstacle that no one of us can change.
And where I’m at, my position sits outside the chain of command, so to speak. I report to the CEO directly, but my only direct reports are within that IT sphere. And that culture change has to happen not just in the areas I have influence over, but throughout the organization. And so, it’s become an exercise in saying the same things over and over and over in as many different ways as I can, to the point where I’ve had to go back to that ownership team executive team and say, “Are you really on board with this? Are you really committed to what you say you want? If you’re not, it’s okay. I just need to know about that now because frankly, that’s not the kind of organization that I want to be part of.” And it’s tough to get people pinned down on that issue.
MURIEL WILKINS: I can appreciate the teenager example or illustration, given that I live 24/7 with two teenagers right now.
BRAEDEN: I’ve been through it too.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. The gap between what we say we want and what we actually do is quite real during that time. Okay, so now you’re here and we’re talking, and so what is the question or challenge that’s on your mind?
BRAEDEN: Yeah, that’s tough to formulate. Since it’s 2024 and these tools exist, I went to ChatGPT and I said, “I’m having trouble describing a feeling that I’m having. Can you help me find the right word or words?”
MURIEL WILKINS: I love it.
BRAEDEN: And it actually came out with some really helpful things. So I’ve been trying for a really long time to affect change in this organization. Some things are changing. We’ve made some really important decisions to bring in people that will move us towards that culture that will support growth and achievement of our goals. That’s gone all the way up to some changes in the senior management team. And those have been hard conversations and you come home and you’re just mentally exhausted. It’s not like I was out cutting trees down, but I’m just beat down by those conversations. But again, focusing on successes. We have made some of those. And we’ve also been able with some of those new people on board who are infusing maturity and professionalism into the organization, we’ve started to see movement towards identifying not just a set of core values, but core competencies. What are the things that when we go looking for new employees, that we are going to run them through a filter of these core attributes that they have to have?
I don’t want to say that there hasn’t been change, that there haven’t been milestones matter successes, but it just feels like there’s so much more to do. And when I look at the calendar and I look at where we are organizationally in terms of the movement towards our long-term goals, which are big, hairy and audacious, it’s hard to see the movement. And I guess ultimately the question is how do other people navigate a timeline that appears to be multi-year ahead of me and maintain the sense of urgency that I have, maintain the passion that I have, maintain or increase my ability to influence throughout the organization and move us towards where we’ve verbally said we want it to go—knowing that it’s going to be a constant marathon process?
And I guess the other angle I’m looking at it through is as we bring in, I feel like, big hitters, they’re coming in…feels like fresh legs, and they’re coming in with gusto and they’re coming in with ideas and I’m like, I’m tired, I need a break. I want those people in this organization, but I’m beat and I feel like I’m losing a step when it comes to keeping up with their ability to influence and drive change. And I kind of feel like I’m getting passed. If it’s a highway, I’m getting past, there’s cars whizzing by me on the fast lane. There’s certainly a part of me that’s like, well, I could certainly go back out on my own and go back to just being a solopreneur. But I’m really invested in this organization and in our mission and the vision that we laid out and the culture that I think we’re making progress towards. But I’m afraid that I’m going to get left behind, if you will, in terms of leading this organization to where it needs to go.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And I love that AI helped you. I love it. Okay, so let me make sure that I am listening as well as AI does. So what I’m hearing from you is big, hairy, audacious goals by the organization. There have been some wins, and yet it feels like achieving those long-term goals seems quite some distance away. And that your level of urgency doesn’t seem matched with the owners’ level of urgency. You’re questioning whether their commitment to the goals is real. And in the meantime, you’re starting to feel a little tired from running this race and you’re losing your gusto, losing a bit of your energy and mojo around it. Is that right?
BRAEDEN: Yeah, well said. Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And so I think the question you’re asking is, do I want to get mojo back for this? And if so, how do I? And what needs to change? Is it them? Is it the goals? Is it me? What’s the deal?
BRAEDEN: That sounds about right, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And so, why does this matter for you now?
BRAEDEN: I think that getting it figured out, if that’s even possible, is going to set the direction for me professionally for the next five to 10 years, at least. I feel like my career has progressed in seven- to 10-year segments. Maybe it’s just coincidence. Maybe that’s a pattern. I don’t know. But I’m here in the sixth year of working with this organization. I think I see opportunities, I see possibilities for me. I am going to be successful. I think I’m committed to myself to be successful and not let other people hold me back. I would love to be successful with other people. It’s funny—I’m an introvert. I’m not a people person. I’m often on the sidelines. That’s why being out of the chain of command is…it has pros and cons. But for me, that’s a pro because I do get to sit on the outside and be invited in, and every time I’m invited in, that feels like a recommitment to why I’m there. That helps to keep me going.
But I guess, again, to answer your question, I’d love to be successful with a team. Certainly I can be successful on my own, but… I don’t know if loyalty is the right word, but I’m loyal or I’m invested, I want to see this group succeed. And that’s what’s got me hanging on to the idea that maybe sticking around and seeing this through is what I want to do. My confidence level that we can, it fluctuates. When we reach those milestones, when we get the right person in the right seat and I see them executing at the level that I felt like they could when I interviewed them, that’s certainly a boost for me. And we’ve had some of that. But to maybe dig down a little bit more, some of that I think is just feel-good. It feels good to see a hire validated by some of the early wins that they can bring to the organization.
But what really feels so far away are some of the measurable things in terms of our revenue targets or our profitability targets or our expansion targets, or again, that community improvement, cultural, societal impact that we think we can have through the work that we do. Those are the things that still feel really far away because on a month-to-month basis, the P&L sheet, the balance sheet, they’re not changing a whole lot. I’m in a position where even the results aren’t consistently there and the commitment to, the dedication to, the discipline, culturally, the discipline to keep the drumbeat of checking those metrics and looking at the budget in relation to how we’re doing, the cadence of meetings and the involvement in meetings from people, they drag me down. They bring my confidence level back down because I still feel like I’m often the one person pushing those kinds of activities and seeing them as critical.
Those are the things that kind of bring me back down to, no, you’re here and this is the moment you’re in and you’re not where you need to be yet. And you are still very much trying to influence people who aren’t then showing you their willingness or commitment to take those things on in your stead or to pick the ball up and run with it where you think they need to own that particular thing.
MURIEL WILKINS: One thing that coaching often reveals is that while something feels like it might be off at work or you might feel stuck in a rut, articulating the actual problem in a succinct way is often pretty hard. Because of that, it’s critical that part of a coaching conversation is actually clearly identifying the problem and pinpointing the pain points before you start working through solutions.
In Braeden’s case, there are a number of possible themes intersecting here. One, he’s feeling a bit of an urge for a shakeup or change coming soon. He’s also excited about the ability to take on more responsibility in his role, but feels challenged by the stage of life the organization seems to be in. And it seems like he’s also feeling a bit burnt out. I think it’s important to break some of these issues apart and get more specific with Braeden about what challenge he’d like to tackle before we start moving to actions he can take. Let’s dive back in.
So there’s a couple of things here. Number one is you talked about your success and that you believe you can and you will be successful. And then you talked about others being successful and the business being successful. So I’ll start there with the question of, what’s the difference between your definition of success for you and whoever these others are, or the organization’s definition of success—if any difference?
BRAEDEN: Yeah, I definitely get a sense that my definition of success is probably growth. And I think we have had a lot of people in the organization whose definition of success is probably comfort. I don’t know if that’s the right word, but they’re comfortable where they are. They’ve got a 9-to-5, they’ve got a paycheck. The company’s in good shape. I mean, the company’s not struggling to stay afloat. It’s struggling to grow. And so, it’s like, who do we want to be? Where do we want to go if it’s just hitting this plateau and staying there? I’m not saying that that’s wrong because I think that that probably does line up with what some people in the organization would prefer because growth is hard.
So yeah, I mean there’s definitely a disconnect. And to be completely fair, where I have been able to influence the hiring of people within the organization, I am looking for purpose-driven individuals because I go back to when I was able to take part in some of these strategic planning, that’s what everyone in the room said that we wanted. And until we reconvene or revisit that and have a large group come back together and say, has that changed? Do we need to deviate? I’m going to keep going with what we said we were going to do.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So there’s this potential disconnect between your desire for growth and what you’re seeing, which is more of an appetite for comfort. I also heard you say that you are not sure if the commitment and the willingness to do what it takes to get to that growth is there, right?
BRAEDEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Based on what?
BRAEDEN: Outwardly behaviors. I think I have tried to do a really good job of teeing up if this is the outcome that you want, this is the behavior that aligns with that outcome. And I get head nodding and I get, “Yep, yep. Right on, 100%. Way to go. Way to point that out.” And then we walk out of the room and the behaviors go right back to what they are currently, the current culture persists. I’ve gone as far as to pull the owner and executive group and say, “Is growth really what you want? Ultimately, this is your company. You get to make this decision. If growth isn’t what you want for your company, we have to say that. We have to say it out loud and we have to communicate it.” That is a strategy. Plateauing is a strategy.
And I think back to my own dad. I mean, he is an incredible leader and he has always been happy to just be his own business, but has never expanded his business, never grew his business, was always happy it paid the bills for the family, and it got him what he needed in terms of income and flexibility in his time to do other volunteer efforts and things like that. So, I get it that that is totally a valid strategy. But when I pull the owner and executive team, I get back, “No, we committed to growth, we committed to growth.” And I go, “Okay, you can tell me that. You can nod your head up and down. You can tell me all the right words and I’ll go out and I’ll do it, but if I don’t see those behaviors from you” —and this is something I have said to them— “I can’t want this more than you.”
And again, I get wins every now and then where we’ll make a decision. The ownership team will make a decision to go bring in a heavy hitter that will move us toward the culture and the system, the way of doing business that’s going to move us in that growth trajectory. But then there’s a lot of days that I walk out and I’m like, ugh, it just wasn’t there and I’ve got to go back. I can’t just hold onto that and not give that feedback.
MURIEL WILKINS: So when you’re not seeing the behavior change that’s aligned with the aggressive growth targets that you said that they have established, is it that they don’t want to change—option number one? Or they don’t know how to change—option number two? Or they’re not changing quickly enough—option number three?
BRAEDEN: Can it be a little bit of all of that? I’m not sure. I guess-
MURIEL WILKINS: Why don’t we say this: which fits the picture best? I don’t even know if I said that right, but you know what I mean? When you had to pick which fits the most, if you had to pick one?
BRAEDEN: I think we have had owners who didn’t know how, or at least I suspected that they didn’t know how. But when we offered them resources or put them with resources, and that could be mentors, that could be other consultants to try to get them what they needed, here’s how you do that, it didn’t change. And I guess if I had to put on my psychologist’s hat, I’d say, well, that must indicate that they didn’t want to. If we gave them what they needed and they said they were going to do it and that it didn’t happen, they must not have wanted to.
The caveat to that—and again, this is where I just don’t know—is I think that they’ve really struggled with the idea of separating their ownership and the entrepreneur side of themselves from the operator side of themselves. They’re constantly getting pulled into the weeds, constantly doing things for people further down the org chart, constantly filling in. And I’m sure that is exhausting, hard to prioritize, hard to get things done, and that probably ultimately makes it hard to change. And so I know that that’s going on. So, it’s a mixed bag.
MURIEL WILKINS: So I mean, look, at the end of the day what’s happening… and we can sit here and try to analyze what’s going on with all of the owners, but you’re the one that’s sitting in front of me. So, at the end of the day, they are not moving at the pace that you’d like them to move or that you believe they should be moving=?
BRAEDEN: I think that’s 100% accurate.
MURIEL WILKINS: What is up with the pace? Why is that pace important to you?
BRAEDEN: So we set specific targets and there’s due dates on those targets. It has to be at this level by this date. And again, big, hairy, audacious. So we always knew going into it’s going to be coin flip. We might get it, we might not. If we don’t get it, we’ve got to get close. Looking at metrics, we are nowhere close. The curve is getting farther and farther away from us every day that passes. I think that’s really what is driving my sense of urgency. And I’ve tried to make it clear if that growth trajectory isn’t realistic anymore or if it’s not desired anymore, if it needs to be adjusted, we have to make that adjustment and communicate it out because it changes everyone’s trajectory. I’m struggling to get an answer other than, “No, that’s what we’re going to do.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so I’m hearing why it matters to you, right?
BRAEDEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Why it matters to you, I think…and check me on this: why it matters to you is a goal was set. You work towards the goal?
BRAEDEN: Pretty much.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. And why is that important? Just so I can understand what the underbelly of that is.
BRAEDEN: Maybe that gets back to something more personal in nature where I am driven to be continually improving. I have goals that I’m working towards. That’s professional, that’s personal. I was unhealthy and overweight and I decided I was going to start running and get to the point where I could do a 5K and then a 10K. Those are things that personally I’ve done. I take that and I equate that professionally to setting a goal and doing what it takes to get to it and calling yourself or your team or your peers out when you’re not on target. And that’s why I say if someone would just give me the feedback, “Ah, actually that’s not what we want to do. We’ve changed our mind.” Okay. Thank you.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, but that’s not the scenario you’re facing.
BRAEDEN: It’s not. It’s not, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Scenario you’re facing is people are saying, “No, I want to lose weight too,” but yet they’re not going to the gym and they’re eating chips and chocolate chip cookies at midnight every night. So, the question becomes what role do you want to play in helping meet their goals? And notice, I said, “in helping them meet their goals,” because guess what? You’re not in either scenario.
BRAEDEN: I’m not them.
MURIEL WILKINS: You’re not them, which means you don’t own the goal.
BRAEDEN: Yeah, you’re right.
MURIEL WILKINS: My question to you is, if you don’t own the goal… I mean you own some goals, you own a part of it, but you don’t own the whole organizational goals. That’s the owners, right? That’s why they’re called the owners. You know what it means to own a company because you were your own boss for a while. As you said, you ran the ship. Now you moved into this. And so, what is your role in this organization? Is it running the ship? Which it could be. I’m just trying to understand what it is.
BRAEDEN: It’s definitely not right now. I mean, I’m outside the chain of command and I think for a reason. I think right now it is facilitating conversations about planning. It is being an advisor in the planning process, and it is capturing the commitments that are made during that planning process and then creating the feedback system whereby people are being reminded of the commitments that were made. Again, it’s so funny because then there’s the IT hat too, but I’m pretty satisfied from the IT standpoint. So, I think the focus on the strategy piece is where my problems are.
MURIEL WILKINS: All the things that you just named, you’re the facilitator of the conversation, you’re the truth-teller, you mirror back, you report back, you say, “Hey, here’s where we are.” Okay?
BRAEDEN: Mm-hmm.
MURIEL WILKINS: To what extent are you doing all those things?
BRAEDEN: To an extent that I make myself uncomfortable with how often I am communicating those things. I should check myself. This is a moment where I can check myself. So, thank you for that question. I think that I do a balanced job of communicating the wins, the positive things, the feel good things and the challenges. There are some days, they’re few and far between, but there are some days where I can really instill kind of like a rah-rah spirit around the leadership table. But more often than not, it is, “Hey, we said we were going to do X or achieve Y by Z date. We’re off track, folks. What’s it going to take to get back on track?” That’s where I think I have trouble. That’s where my role stops and I turn and I look at our ownership and I go, “What are you going to do about it?” And then plans are made, assignments are made.
And I count that as a win because when I walked into the doors of this organization, those things weren’t being done. The questions weren’t being asked, the commitments weren’t being tracked, the plans weren’t being adjusted when we were off track, or at the time they were off track when I wasn’t part of it. But again, it’s like we can just keep kicking the can. We can keep moving the goalposts, whatever metaphor, and at some point somebody’s got to be accountable for that.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yep. I’m going to go back to something you said, which is you want to be successful and you will be successful. So, it sounds to me as though, given the seat that you’re in and the role that you hold which is—again, just going back to what you said—facilitating the conversation, holding the mirror up, reminding what the goals were, pointing out where the wins are and where we’re not on target. It sounds to me like you were checking off the boxes on those. So, you are being successful in terms of that particular role. I think the question is, are you in a role that would enable you and give you the latitude to be able to change the behavior of the organization and the culture, and quite frankly, the ownership team?
BRAEDEN: Right. No, I don’t think that I am, and I think that I’ve recognized that. As we have gone out and brought in heavy hitters, there was a time where I questioned whether I wanted, needed to step into an operational role where I would have not just influence but authority to go with it. But I chose not to because I felt like the right thing to do was to go find someone who had demonstrated experience taking an organization like ours from its teenage years into the next phase. I’m genuinely excited about that hire. I am excited about the prospects of having someone with that experience. I’m excited to see where that goes. But I did intentionally allow that opportunity to pass by me because I didn’t feel like I was the right person for that role. I don’t know, maybe that wasn’t fair to me. Maybe I was wrong to do that. I’m not sure.
And going back to something I said earlier, this is another moment though that gives me a little bit of apprehension because now we’re bringing in someone who frankly outpaces me in every aspect, operationally, probably an incredible strategic thinker, may not need someone with my skill set. That is causing me some anxiety. Where do I fit in with that person on board? This person’s coming in hopefully to take a lot of responsibility on the day-to-day operations away from the CEO, so that that person can then focus on growing the business. But just to try to put a bow on it, how am I going to interface with that new person, that excellent leader in an operational role? I’m hoping that it can become a good partnership, but again, they’re coming in with potentially fresh legs, different ideas. And that’s where I go, man, this is possibly also where I get left behind in terms of my influence, which lays outside the chain of command.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, so here’s the thing though. Hopefully the individual who’s coming in is going to fulfill the very thing that you want, or what you’ve been saying you want, which is to move the organization closer to these goals. Okay?
BRAEDEN: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: You had an opportunity to potentially play that role. For different reasons you decided not to. And yet that role is the scope of what it seems like you want to be doing rather than being in solely an advisory capacity. Let me just pause there because there’s a rub there for me. So, let’s not focus so much on the person who’s come in. I want to focus on you. There’s a rub there. What is the role that you want to have in the organization?
BRAEDEN: My mind goes there as well, and part of me says, You know what—let’s just say if IT was what really drove me in younger years, previous years—this could be a great opportunity for me to actually hand off a lot of this coaching, counseling, advising, to your point, the person, the people that will take us to the goals that we set out. And I love the idea of seeing this organization hit its goals. And as much as there’s kind of that, oh, what’s the right word? I don’t know, maybe it’s a pride thing. Maybe it’s a giving up control thing. I get apprehensive about what that looks like, but can I step back or focus in more of the IT space? Sure. That’s a possibility.
MURIEL WILKINS: Is it what you want?
BRAEDEN: Is it what I want? Yeah, I mean, that’s a great question. I mean, I’ve asked myself that. I’ve tried to talk myself through that. I’ve tried to talk to other people about that. I’ve gone as far as to talk to a recruiter about that and say, “Look at my resume. Listen to what I’m doing right now. What is my career trajectory? What do people in this position wind up doing?” And there’s probably a trajectory where I become a consultant to other organizations. If I can get to the point where I’ve made myself redundant by bringing in the operational and strategic leadership that this organization needs to go and achieve its goals, maybe I go find some other organization to do that for now that I know the process that I walked this organization through, to a certain extent. That’s a great question: what do I want to do? Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: At this point in the coaching conversation, we started to see some of the cycle that Braeden found himself in at work: the frustration around setting goals, hearing that there’s buy-in, and then things just stalling out. And while he’s frustrated that the organization’s executives are not taking action towards the goals, he hasn’t questioned whether he’s in a position to actually influence them in the way he’d like to. This led to me asking him what he really wants out of his role. Thinking about that question could potentially help him get clarity about his situation and start thinking about how he might move forward in a different way to get different results. It’s time to reflect back a bit of what I’ve been hearing from him from this new perspective.
Here’s where I’m seeing the struggle. And again, just from my purview. On the one hand, it sounds like you’re great and you do enjoy being able to advise, consult, influence. But what breaks down for you is when you’re doing the advise, influence, consult, and yet the people you’re doing that for are not moving towards the goals that you are advising them on. So, it’s almost like you’re telling them, “Yes, I’m here to tell you to do this. I’m going to advise you on it,” but then you get frustrated when they’re actually not moving towards it.
BRAEDEN: Yeah, that’s definitely a big thing for me.
MURIEL WILKINS: But when we are…and believe me, I know, I mean this is what I live through every single day. When we are in a capacity of advising, that’s what it is. It’s advice. It’s not owning it. You don’t own the results of the performance. The buck doesn’t stop with you. And so, the question is really you’ve experienced both. You’ve experienced being in a role where you’re more of an advisor. You’ve experienced having your own business where the buck did stop with you for your business. And now you’re kind of in this hybrid.
And I think what’s happening is you’re at a place right now where it’s kind of like, Hmm, which one do I want to lean into more? Because yes, I’m in this advisory capacity, and yet what frustrates me is that I don’t own the goals, that I don’t own what it takes to actually get to those goals. You could, but you’d need to be in a different role, either at this company or someplace else. But you’ve got to decide which one it is. And what you can’t do is say, “I want to be able to do X, but from my seat in Y.” Doesn’t work that way. Back to your example of losing weight. I want to be able to go run a marathon, but I want to do it while sitting in my recliner seat in front of the TV eating bonbons. It doesn’t work. Which one is it?
BRAEDEN: Yeah. That’s a great question and will certainly cause me to do more soul-searching and introspection and try to figure that out for sure. I mean, I have an inkling of where I want to go. General—I have a general inkling of what I want. Going back to, I don’t think I could be satisfied in a transactional IT only role in the future because I’ve had a taste of senior leadership and I like, to steal the line, being in “the room where it happens.” I do get excited by that prospect.
So really it’s like do you pick the lane of being the doer and try to find probably—I don’t want to undersell it—but some kind of an operational lead kind of a role? Or would I prefer to be in that advising role? And to your great point, as much as I feel a sense of ownership over the attainment of results, it’s really not fair to myself to be trying to make that leap and redefining what success looks like. Success for me really can’t be the organization achieving the results that it has expressed the desire to achieve, but for me to do my best in providing the advice, the guidance, the facilitation, the feedback to the people that own that goal.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right.
BRAEDEN: And this is great because you’re connecting dots for me. In the past few years, I think this is mainly since I took on kind of this advisor officially—when I officially got that set of duties given to me, and I will say in a very ambiguous way that’s led us to the point that we’re at—my compensation also became partially tied to the achievement of those goals. And from the get-go, I felt like something was misaligned there. I have gone back to my supervisor and said, “When we hit our goals, I love getting these bonuses, but I don’t directly control whether we achieve them or not. And so when we don’t, it kind of stinks because I’m like, I couldn’t have done anything differently.”
And he’s heard that feedback and his response has always been, “Our motivations are the same.” And I think that what I’m getting from this is no, they’re really not. I have this intuitive feeling that they’re not, behaviorally they’re not. They’re not, period. And that is probably the next conversation that needs to happen because that takes it all the way from how I’m compensated for what I do and the outcomes that I produce, all the way back through what is my role. Let’s really get clear about what my role is here, where my influence begins and ends, and where any authority that I have begins and ends. And let’s come up with clarification on what I do, how I do it, and how I’m compensated for it. Those things should align better. So that’s for sure an actionable thing that I can take away from this.
MURIEL WILKINS: And look, I think that role clarification, knowing where you stand in the puzzle is critical because you can’t be the middle piece of the puzzle and the corner at the same time. And I don’t know about you, but when I do puzzles, I’m always looking for the four corners first.
BRAEDEN: I hear you.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know why. What I’m suggesting is clarifying for yourself first, I actually think, before you go talk to others because you’ve mentioned you’ve had this intuitive feel, you’re sensing something’s not quite aligned. So, I think there’s a big part of this around just being honest with yourself around what it is that you want. How do you want to affect change? Not whether you do or don’t because it’s clear that you do want to affect change, but how do you want to do it? Do you have the capacity and the skills to be able to be in that type of position to affect change the way that you want to? And is it possible where you are now? And if it’s not, then you kind of have your answer.
So, a big piece of this is you need clarity to then be able to align yourself, get into a posture that enables you to meet the goals. In the same way that you want that for that team—where you’re like, I need them to do X, Y, Z so that they can meet those goals, but I’m not seeing that behavior—it’s the exact same thing for you, except it’s more around the position and the seat that you’re in that allows for the behaviors that meet the goals that you want. And right now, you’re in a great position, you have great behaviors. I’m not quite sure whether they’re aligned with the type of change that you want to have an impact on.
BRAEDEN: That makes sense, yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. So there’s a lot there. For the sake of clarity of this conversation, I’d love to hear what your biggest takeaway is and how you feel at the end of this conversation versus when we first started.
BRAEDEN: I think here’s something else that I intuitively feel. I recently went through some personal counseling and one thing that really came out of it was a personal mission statement, a statement of purpose, a statement of values. And coming out the gate, I was on fire. I was like, “Yeah, I’m going to start analyzing all these aspects of my life.” And again, trying to find that alignment between the things that I do and what’s important to me and where I want to go.
But I think that I could sense that there was kind of this disconnect professionally. And I think the key takeaway for me is to go back and reevaluate where I’m at professionally now, where I want to be professionally in the greater context of those personal statements of purpose and the things that are important to me. Because the word that keeps bubbling up as I am hearing your feedback and thinking about what you’re saying is, I reject any ceilings that should be above me. I’m serious about that. And this feels like a ceiling to a certain extent, and I need to crack through that, through realigning my professional goals with who I want to be and where I want to go. So, I think that’s my key takeaway, that intellectual honesty with oneself. That’s very important. And I can feel it when I’m not doing that. And I think this is a moment where I’m going, yeah, I wasn’t really being intellectually honest with myself in how I was looking at this. I was ignoring some key issues. So, I think that’s the biggest change from where this conversation started to now.
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah. Well, if what this enabled you to do is just be more honest with yourself, kudos to you, because that’s not easily done.
BRAEDEN: Yeah, no, you’re right. That’s hard. It’s easy to push your intuition back into the backseat and go-
MURIEL WILKINS: So easy.
BRAEDEN: … “No, no, no, no, no, no, no. This is what’s really going on.” But ultimately, it comes back out. It comes back out.
MURIEL WILKINS: It always does. It always does. All right. Well, thank you, Braeden.
BRAEDEN: Thank you. I appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: Braeden came into the coaching conversation trying to figure out how to get senior leadership to change, but that framing kept him stuck. It wasn’t until he turned the lens on himself and started kicking the tire on whether he was making the moves that would get him towards the goals he wanted that he started seeing a way through the situation he’s in. Many times the way forward is a layer or more below what we think the issue is. It’s important to reframe the questions we ask ourselves in order to get unblocked.
That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
and for this season. We’ll be taking a break over the winter and coming back in the spring with some new episodes. If you’re dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to have you on the show next season. Apply now at CoachingRealLeaders.com. And if you want to connect with me live, you can join me at CoachingRealLeadersCommunity.com where I host live discussions about leadership and coaching. You can also follow me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins and Instagram at @CoachMurielWilkins.
Before you go, I have a really important ask of you. If you love the coaching conversations on
Coaching Real Leaders
, it would mean the world to me if you could head over to Apple, Spotify, or wherever you listen to subscribe to the show and leave a five-star review. And of course, if you think others would learn from these episodes, please share it with them. Thank you to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant Emily Sopha; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners who share in their journeys. From HBR Podcast Network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode 6: How Can I Set the Right Boundaries in a New Job?
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: I am Muriel Wilkins, and this is
Coaching Real Leaders
, part of the HBR podcast network. I’m a long-time executive coach who works with highly successful leaders who’ve hit a bump in the road. My job is to help them get over that bump by clarifying their goals and figuring out a way to reach them, so that hopefully they can lead with a little more ease. I typically work with clients over the course of several months, but on this show we have a one-time coaching meeting focusing on a specific leadership challenge they’re facing. Today’s guest is someone we’ll call Sarah to protect her confidentiality. Early on, she chose a career path that would allow her to help people and she’s highly mission-driven.
SARAH: When I was managing my own teams, it was really supporting my direct reports into achieving whatever was next for them professionally and supporting them to be able to be the best that they could be for our organization. That was what brought me so much satisfaction. And around that same time, I experienced my first run-in with burnout and left a role that had just completely consumed me. I had one little one at the time, and there were plenty of days where I would be gone for meetings hours before she was awake. I’d be home hours after she went to bed. That was a big moment, career wise, for me of this kind of reckoning of, Your job can take over your life if you let it.
MURIEL WILKINS: After that experience, Sarah pivoted. Finding a role in a new industry with some of the same qualities around helping and guiding others. Once again, she ended up experiencing burnout and decided to take some time off from work. Now as she begins another position, she’s hoping to avoid the same burnout pattern.
SARAH: I love work. I love working. I love the satisfaction of working. I love working with leaders. I was very intentional about, I want my next job to be smaller. I intentionally took an individual contributor role in a capacity that I think I can bring a lot of value. I start my new job in a few days, and as I look ahead, I am asking myself the question, how do you stay out of burnout this time?
MURIEL WILKINS: Sarah’s looking for guidance to make sure she’s starting off her new job in the right mindset and to find ways to not repeat old patterns. I kicked off the coaching session by digging deeper into her decision to intentionally take a step back from leadership and to move into an individual contributor role.
SARAH: It felt like the right fit in my career at this moment for a few reasons. Number one, because I was intentionally making a pivot into a much more focused job content area, and I need to learn the ropes before I am going to be ready for management. For me, it felt like, Let’s start in an individual contributor role and see how that goes. Also, because I worry that maybe having beyond an individual contributor role was part of what was contributing to these experiences of burnout in the past.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I’m curious, how do you define burnout? Because how you define burnout might be very different than how I define it, right? Just like my kids say when I make toast, they consider my toast burned and I consider it very appropriate.
SARAH: Delicious toast. My definition of burnout is when work comes first above everything else, and that is not only my practice of the work, but that is the expectation of the work. In the experiences I’ve had leading till now that have left me so burned out, people worked like they didn’t have families. People worked like nothing else mattered in their lives. I think it’s really that there’s just no room for anything but work. Work is all consuming.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, help me understand. I know you said one of the examples you shared was that you were getting home… There were days where you just wouldn’t see your child because you were at work. Right? Help me understand what other indicators you had. That’s a big one. I’m not dismissing it, that’s a big one. What other indicators did you have that work was basically consuming everything for you?
SARAH: When you ask it that way, Muriel, it not only makes me think of work being all consuming, but it not being possible to accomplish everything that was on my plate to be accomplished, which was part of what was making work be so all consuming. Certainly, a huge indicator for me is I have more work on my plate than anyone could ever possibly dig out from underneath. And the stress and anxiety that comes with, “Oh Lord, there’s no way…” There’s just no way to ever dig out from under it. That the kind of weight and pressure is certainly an indicator that burnout is coming. Another big piece for me has been that I really struggle with not only that I am suffering under this mountain of work that… We’re understaffed, there’s no way to get it done. Then also watching all of my peers that I care about and want to help them be successful or my direct reports that I care about and want to help them be successful, that they are also struggling with realizing that we’re just never going to out from underneath this.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Clearly what I’m hearing from you is a lot of it was around what was happening around you, the expectations that were being placed in terms of the level of work and quantity of work that you had to do. How were those expectations being expressed? How did you know that those were the expectations?
SARAH: Very directly. I think in both circumstances I had bosses all over the place. There wasn’t just one clear line or one clear funnel for how work was coming. I’ve had the experience of bosses dropping a dozen new projects for me and my team to manage without having any understanding of scope and that everything was urgent, everything was communicated as an urgent priority. Those expectations were pretty explicit.
MURIEL WILKINS: Ultimately you decided to leave those circumstances? And you left, why?
SARAH: I left because I knew the work environment that I was in was taking a toll on my health, my ability to show up in the world the way that I want to show up in the world. I knew that it was not the right place for me to be able to thrive, much less survive.
MURIEL WILKINS: First of all, kudos to you for recognizing that it ain’t working. Most people just keep grinding it out, and making a choice and trying again. And now you’ve taken on a new role, and you’re trying one more time. Kudos to you. Thank you. And I’d be a fool to sit here and say that some of this is not circumstantial situational, and due to, as you said, expectations, environment, culture of what’s seen as how people need to behave in that particular workplace. And I think the fact that you were seeing it in others as well, tells me that there’s something cultural going on there. It’s not just Sarah, right? That said, I don’t have the culture in front of me. I have Sarah in front of me. I am curious about… because it seems like you’ve reflected on this a lot, I’m curious about how you think you’ve contributed to your experience of burnout?
SARAH: Muriel, this for me is the question because I know that there are cultural components and factors to burning out. I also am doing some exploration about what is it in me that has wound up in this place twice now. There’s something very satisfying about a job well done, and that has been something historically that has really motivated me. I like the gold stars that come with doing a good job at work. There is a people component to this. I have really enjoyed the camaraderie of good work friends. You forge some tight bonds when you’re in the fire together, and I think I sacrificed a lot for those relationships thinking that I could make the circumstances better when really we were fighting a big culture battle that me as one individual person was not going to put all but much of a dent in.
And I think I shouldered way too much responsibility in that capacity. I think it’s a little bit of, I’m not afraid of running toward fires. I’ve stepped into a leadership role voluntarily when the pandemic hit. I willingly took on a leadership role that was way beyond my capacity or abilities just for the sake of trying to be helpful and wanting to try to smooth the path for my team who had already been through a lot. Yeah, some of this I definitely do to myself.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. I’m hearing two things. One is the satisfaction you get from job well done, right? And the star. The other is the relational aspect and helping people out and shouldering the responsibility that really is a collective responsibility, but you’re taking it on your own. Help me understand what that looks like. I’m a concrete girl. Help me understand what that looks like in day-to-day life. As a result of those two things what are you more prone to do? If I was following you around for a day, and you are like,
I love getting a job well done. I love the camaraderie. We’re all in it together.
How does that drive how you act? What would I see if I followed you around, if I shadowed you for a day?
SARAH: If you followed me around for a day when I was investing deeply into both of those activities, you would see me engaging with other people a lot. I would spend a lot of time with the people around me, and some of that was… I had a lot of really smart colleagues that I got to work with and that we were doing awesome work together, and that brought me a lot of joy. And I would pursue those opportunities to work with really smart people, because I liked being in the room with them. And then you would probably also see me like, Oh man, I was supposed to leave the office half an hour to go because it was my day to do pickup. I got caught up and did not leave when I was supposed to leave. Now I’m feeling frantic and guilty and panicked, rushing to the pickup line, or rushing to dinner or whatever is next on where I cross over from my professional agenda to my personal agenda and obligations.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. All right. What makes you feel guilty about it? Because you made a choice, right? You just said, “Hey, I stayed here instead of going there, and yet I feel guilty.” Where’s the guilt from?
SARAH: I think the guilt is from… I would rather make the choice not to stay, but I keep making the choice to stay and sometimes that feels like a good choice and there are good things that come out of it, and sometimes that feels like a default choice that I’m not even consciously making. It’s more of a habit.
MURIEL WILKINS: And the habit serves you in what way?
SARAH: Investing heavily in those work relationships and then whatever work product comes out of those relationships.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. What I’m hearing from you, SARAH, is that work makes you feel good. You enjoy the relationships with your work people. You enjoy being around them, and you enjoy getting stuff done. It gives you a sense of satisfaction. How long-lasting is that satisfaction?
SARAH: Not long-lasting enough.
MURIEL WILKINS: Tell me more about that.
SARAH: I think the satisfaction feels temporary because there’s always another mountain to climb. There’s always something huge hanging out there that has been tossed onto my plate. I am not one to stop and celebrate the successes. I’m never one to sit in that satisfaction and think like,
Yeah, that was fun. We did a really good job on that. Man, look at the amazing things we just accomplished.
The satisfaction, I have memories of driving home in the car and being like,
that was super cool.
And then go to bed and wake up the next morning and the crushing weight of whatever comes next has replaced that feeling of satisfaction.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. When is it enough for you?
SARAH: I don’t know that there is a point of enough, and maybe that’s what I’ve been chasing all of this time.
MURIEL WILKINS: Look, you have two choices, right? You can either say, this is when something is enough, and I know I’ve met the goal and this is what brings me satisfaction and I stop. Or nothing is ever enough, which we know what that leads to.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right? You’re constantly chasing.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m not here to say one or the other. I’m just saying you’ve been operating from a place of like, Yes, I get huge sense of satisfaction from getting things done and being able to cross that finish line. But I’ve operated in a way where there is no finish line and that’s what then, in terms of the parts that you can own, leads you to continuously go, go, go, go. What would it look like for you to actually have some finish lines? What would those finish lines look like?
SARAH: What a really good question. I don’t know. I think I’ve run right through them in the past and never stopped to notice what they could possibly look like. What could a finish line look like? I have a hard time envisioning what a finish line could look like. I have an easier time when you say the word finish line, just envisioning there’s some space around me. I think in the past I have felt like things were just crushing down on me. What feels like a finish line is like, I have some breathing room.
MURIEL WILKINS: Where does that breathing room need to come from? I’m just going to share what I’m observing just through some of the words that you’re using. For example, you said, “Things are tossed at me.” Okay. Anything can be tossed at me. The difference is do I pick it up? Do I catch it? You could toss all the things you want as long as you don’t hit me with it, and even then you could hit me. If it’s snowball, you could hit me. It’ll melt right off. It might temporarily sting. But if you toss a ball at me, the difference is do I catch it? Do I pick it up when it’s fallen on the floor or do I see it fall as my old dog used to do. I’d throw the stick at my dog and she would just stare at it and then stare back at me, and wait for me to go pick it up, unless I had a treat.
Then she would actually pick it up. Not to compare us, you and I to dogs, although they’re lovely animals, sentient beings, but you get what I’m saying, right? Yes, things are being tossed at you, but what are you doing when things are being tossed at you? Yes. Expectations are coming down from this matrix. You have four different leaders who are all sending mandates of what needs to be done, and it’s super urgent and as you said, with no recognition of what’s happening in the other areas. What are you doing in those situations?
SARAH: At some point, I just accepted that it was the way it was and that you say, “Do you pick the stick up or not?” Man, I never even stopped to think that there was an option not to pick up the sticks.
MURIEL WILKINS: In order to help Sarah work through strategies for preventing burnout at her new job, I had to more deeply understand what led her into these situations in the past. The initial reasons she gave for burnout were organizational, which are valid and important context for me to understand. But ultimately, one person can’t change the entire culture of an organization. What they can do is uncover some of their thoughts or behaviors that might be contributing to their experiences, because that we can work to change.
For Sarah, we quickly uncovered that the culture contributed, but so did her deep connection to her coworkers and her desire to go above and beyond for them. Another factor was her own drive to do a good job and accomplish things. So, as she starts to gear up for this new role, one thing that I think might be helpful for her is to reframe how she thinks about her work and her colleagues, just to see there is more than one way of approaching the situation. The first step is to start talking through some alternate paths she could take to approach her career challenges. One option is definitely, it just is the way it is, and I’m just going to let them keep doing what they’re doing and I’m going to keep doing what I’ve been doing. And we already know what that looks.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. It leads to what you’ve already said, burnout. Option number two is I’m going to wait until they stop setting all these crazy expectations, throwing all these balls at me, expecting me to work around the clock. I’m going to wait until they change the way they lead in that capacity. Until then I’m going to keep doing what I’ve been doing, but I’m just going to wait. That’s certainly an option. Good luck.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Option number three is, okay, I see what’s happening. They just keep throwing things at me, right? They’re not communicating with each other. Everything’s always urgent. They keep throwing tasks at me. I see it’s not stopping no matter what I do. The list keeps going and going and going. Is there a way that I could change my response to this that will both give me work satisfaction and allow me to have camaraderie with my work colleagues and give me the breathing room and space that I believe I need? That option number three is the one you said, “Huh, I never knew that I even had that option.” Let’s explore that a little bit. Not saying it’s what you’re going to do, but I just want to explore it. What would it look like for you to change the way that you respond under the same circumstances?
SARAH: I think it would feel less like, This is happening to me. And more like, I have some agency in the way I work. I think culturally that would not have been an acceptable practice. I think that would’ve led to alienation and there was a lot of favoritism. Regardless of the specifics, I think ultimately that would’ve tanked my opportunities in the places where I’ve been in the past. Culturally, I think that the awareness I have and where I’m looking now, the job that I’m about to start, I have looked for somebody to work with who I can talk to easily. I think that those channels of communication being open are important. I have high hopes that a new environment and my eyes being open to the third way being possible, that I can find a space where I’m able to not only say, but then also be heard that, “Okay, we need to prioritize.” Or, “We need to shift some things around.” I don’t feel like I’ve had the ability to in the past.
MURIEL WILKINS: Of course. And in no way do we want to operate without any organizational awareness and understanding of what the dynamics are. What you have to be careful of is saying, “Huh, because those are the organizational dynamics and that’s the culture, I am left with…” As you said, “No agency. I have no choice.” You do have choice. We didn’t talk about option number four, but option number four is you exit, which is what you did, right? You leave the station. You exit stage, left, okay? Which you did. But, of course, given that this has happened in different types of environments for you, I think the question for you around like, Okay, what part do I play? What can I do so that if I go into another environment, even if it’s an environment where it feels like it’s more conducive to have these types of conversations around expectations and priorities, et cetera. I still am doing my part in trying to mitigate, minimize burnout as much as possible. Okay?
I want to try to get really tactical here because it’s important that we don’t just talk about this conceptually, but that you have some actions and some different ways of practicing burnout mitigation strategies, right?
SARAH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: We’re going to call them very fancy word that we just made up. Okay. It was interesting to me because earlier in our conversation you said, “I actually do sort of run towards the fire.” That’s the word you used. And I had this image of you running towards the fire literally and then getting burned, like we’re talking about burnout. My question is, when a professional runs into the fire – a firefighter, right – they have on all this protective gear. The gear is there to protect what?
SARAH: Firefighter.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. It’s there to not protect what? What does it not protect?
SARAH: The fire?
MURIEL WILKINS: The fire, exactly. It’s not there to protect the fire. It’s there to protect the firefighter. I want us to stick with this image, okay? Because I think you like the fire, and I’m not going to take that away from you. You like the challenge. You like the work. You took some time off from work and here you are saying, “Nope, I’m going back in.” Right? Okay.
SARAH: Being out of the fire is not the place for me. Please let me back in.
MURIEL WILKINS: I want us to think about, what’s your protective gear? I don’t think you’ve been wearing protective gear. I think you’ve just been like, I’ve got it, I’m running in, and then I’m waiting till I’m sizzling and I can’t do this, and then I’m out and then I go right back in. We don’t want that. We want you to be able to be in the fire and fight it, do your job. What’s a protective gear that you feel you need or that you think could work?
SARAH: Yeah, the first thing that comes to mind is access to and the willingness to use my own voice. I think the difference between the first work burnout experience and the second work burnout experience was that the first one, if we’re using the fire analogy, was a wildfire that blew out of nowhere. I was surprised at how fast it knocked me off my feet.
I think in the most recent work experience, I could see it coming. But I, for lots of reasons, my own reasons and cultural reasons, just did not feel like I could use my voice to say, “We got trouble. This is not working. There are lots of conflicting priorities happening here. This ship is going down.” I didn’t have the words to say it. It didn’t feel safe enough to say it. Didn’t use my voice. That makes me think that I need to stop and do some reflection on a more regular basis of like, “Is the ship going down?” What are the signs that I’m seeing that the ship might be taking on water? Or that the fire is spreading faster than we can manage it. Faster than I can manage it so that it doesn’t sneak up on me the way that it has felt sometimes like it’s snuck up on me before. That maybe more granular awareness feels important.
MURIEL WILKINS: And if you had that awareness, then what?
SARAH: I think if I had that awareness coupled with an environment where I feel like I can use my voice, I can advocate for myself. I think I do get better at that as I grow in my career. I think if I have the awareness and now have some more confidence in using my voice, I’m much better prepared to have a conversation with my leadership to say, “I’m seeing some things. I’m noticing that things aren’t going the way that we’re expecting. How can we work together to help shift and to help respond to what’s happening around us?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. That’s having conversations about how can we change the tide? What’s the conversation that Sarah needs to have with herself around what Sarah needs to do today to be able to deal with this storm, this fire that’s coming, and that’s spreading wildly?
SARAH: Again, this vision of clear space around me. I think that busyness and connection and people around me has always felt like success and has movement and felt like we were accomplishing things. I actually think that what would be more helpful is I need to create some space for myself in order to either be able to be responsive or be able to slow down and move through whatever the changing winds are a little more methodically so that I’m not caught so off guard.
MURIEL WILKINS: When we think about space, and I’m seeing you as you’re talking about, you’re using hand gestures. When things are coming in at you, we have less space, we feel constricted. When we have more space, things are pushed out away from us. What are the things that you would need to create space from, and how would you do that? Because things are coming into your space and you’re letting them and you’re letting them by doing what?
SARAH: I think I’m not communicating that what may be coming into my space with a label of urgent is not urgent like some of the other things that are already in my space.
MURIEL WILKINS: Either it’s not urgent or it’s not welcome. When somebody comes to your house, how do they come to your house? Do they just barge the door open and walk in? And if they do do that… I’m curious, do you have people do that?
SARAH: Well, we’ve got neighborhood kids that are constantly barging in, but I’m thinking…
MURIEL WILKINS: And what do you do?
SARAH: Most of the time I greet them with a hug because I’m really glad to see them, but sometimes I’m like, “Man, I really wish they had knocked first.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, awesome. When that happens, what do you say? I’m the kid. I barge in and you’re like, “I really wish they had knocked first.” Right? That’s what went inside your… Then what do you say to the kid?
SARAH: “Hey bud, we’re getting ready to leave. You can’t stay. We got to go. Move it out.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, what did you not say to that kid? “Hey, ring the doorbell next time.” Or, “You know what? I love that you’re here and we actually can’t hang out because we’re about to go out. You know what? When you come over, I’d really appreciate it if you would ring the doorbell before you came in.” But I love the fact that 95% of the time – I’m putting a percentage on it – you’re like, “I just give them a big hug and laugh.” Okay, let’s think about this in the workplace. I think this is what’s happening at work.
SARAH: Yep.
MURIEL WILKINS: The stuff’s coming in your office and you’re not saying, “Knock first.” You’re not saying, “Yeah, nope, not now, later.” Or you’re not saying, “Actually you’re not invited here.” Right? Who are you?
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I don’t know this kid. I’ve never seen you around. You’re just saying, “Oh, come on in. Let me give you a big fat hug and make you comfortable.” And guess what happens when you do that?
SARAH: They just keep coming. They just keep, keep coming.
MURIEL WILKINS: They just keep coming, which is amazing if that’s what you want. But what I’m hearing from you is that’s not what you want. You want some, but you don’t want it all the time, every time.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: Let’s put that in the workplace, really tactical. Tasks are coming your way. People are wanting to engage with you.
SARAH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: And you love it. They give you the warm and fuzzies. You love crossing tasks off your list, and you love being collegial and having the relationships, and you also want some space. What are some of the things that you could be saying or doing to create space?
SARAH: Oof, I think so much of it has to start with awareness. As you’re reflecting back to me what I’m saying to you, it kicks me in the fields, Muriel, because there are so many times where I’ve known that in a work capacity, my coworkers were in really awful situations and I wanted to be the most pleasant person they interacted with during the day, because everything else was just garbage. And I just wanted to be an easy, bright spot when there weren’t a lot of those. I certainly think that changing circumstances and getting out of that was maybe even more important than I realized. If I’m starting fresh, then I don’t want to start out on that foot. I don’t want to be looking for problems to step in and be somebody’s bright spot, especially going into a new job. I want to be helpful and I want to be collegial, but I don’t want to fall back into that tendency of mine of swooping into the rescue.
I think walking in with some awareness… Because I think that creates space to begin with. Instead of day one feeling like things are crushing in on me, giving myself some time to get acclimated and to get a better understanding of what the dynamics are, what the politics and the dynamics are around me, the team dynamics are around me, feels important. Then thinking about the other, what are the signs that burnout is coming? Well, it’s that I would pack my days with people and then I would come home and still have to do the work. My evenings were filled with all of the work and that it would be okay to leave some blank space in my daily itinerary to do the work.
MURIEL WILKINS: If you did that, if you put some space in your day to do the work, what would that mean you would have to do with the people?
SARAH: Be less available. Be less time available and less emotionally available.
MURIEL WILKINS: This, my friend, Sarah, is what we call “boundaries,” and it’s our ability to say, “Oh my gosh, that sounds great. No, I can’t meet with you today at ten o’clock and I might not ever be able to meet with you.” Or, “I might be able to meet with you next week.” You’ve got to figure it out, right? Oftentimes, we think boundaries are against the other person, but the boundaries are really there to protect yourself. They are your protective gear. The protective gear that firefighters wear are a boundary between them to protect them from what’s out there, from the fire.
What is interesting to me and what you’ve said is you said, “I just wanted to be a light to all these people.” But when you think about burnout, the light fizzles, the light goes away. Brené Brown says something, I can’t remember in which of her books, but she talks about how compassion, which is really about being that light for other people, being a witness to other people’s pain and suffering, I’m using the words that you’ve used, is not possible without boundaries because you fizzle out. She said it much more eloquently than what I’m saying. We can’t separate the two. One is in service of the other, but what it requires is to have some self-compassion in order to place the boundaries, which means, “Hey, as much as you’re wanting to be there for other people, what are you doing to be there for yourself?”
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: And what are you putting in place? I appreciate and hugely respect your starting point around awareness, and that is definitely what needs to be at the foundation. Then we need to add in the action because awareness just for the sake of awareness, is just awareness. It doesn’t necessarily lead to anything. This is why I’m pushing you around the action. I think when you say, “Hey, if I have an awareness, I think I need to have more space in my calendar in terms of time, but I also need emotional space.” Okay, what does that translate to in terms of what you say or what you don’t say or what you do or what you don’t do? How does that translate to your to-do list? Let me throw one at you, okay? What would it look like if going into this job you were like, “Non-negotiable. I leave at 6:00.” As I say that to you, how does it make you feel?
SARAH: It’s scandalous, Muriel. It sounds so good. I’m like, “Oh my God. Do people say that? Do people actually say that and have that respected?”
MURIEL WILKINS: Here’s the thing, I think you’re in this vicious cycle with yourself because even the words you just used, like when you say, “Do people say that and they’re respected?” Well, I don’t know in this new place, but do you respect that?
SARAH: Absolutely.
MURIEL WILKINS:
Okay. You said you haven’t even started this job yet, and I’m not saying this is the particular one, but you’ve got to start somewhere because I feel like what’s happening is you’re waiting for people to tell you what’s permissible.
SARAH: Yes.
MURIEL WILKINS: It’s like you’re at your house and you’re waiting for somebody to tell you, “This is what’s acceptable in terms of what to eat.” Versus saying, “Oh, I want to eat fruits and vegetables.” And that’s what I eat. Right? Then if somebody else is like, “Nope, you shouldn’t eat that.” Then I’ll pay attention to that. I’m just saying there’s a different starting point and are you willing to basically say, “Here are my standards. Here are my rules of engagement.” And then let me see how they play out.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: As Sarah pointed out, awareness is a really important step here, as well as in a lot of my coaching conversations. It’s about sorting out exactly what is causing a problem for you and what about that is truly in your control. Then we can start breaking down what your goals are and some possible options for changing your situation. As Sarah goes into this role, she’s learned that she really needs to think about boundaries that she can put up. We’ve let it sink in why this is so important for her, and now it’s time to get tangible and tactical. Let’s listen, as Sarah starts thinking about some reasonable rules of engagement she might want to try out as she begins this new career chapter.
SARAH: There are certain days that I do drop off and pick up and that I take the time either in the morning or in the afternoon to be done with work and that I’m going to transition and be fully mom.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay.
SARAH: And that is meaningful space to me. That is something that I’ve sacrificed way too easily that I don’t want to lose again.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. One would be drop off and pick up. That’s number one. Let’s come up with three. So scandalous.
SARAH: So scandalous. Gosh, if I’m dreaming, if this is like pie in the sky, I can do whatever I want, I would love to have no meetings on Monday mornings. Let’s take Monday mornings to get ourselves organized and get focused for the week, and I’m not available on Thursdays from 12:00 to 1:00 while I go do whatever it is that fills my cup up outside of constantly chasing the sense of accomplishment and the gold stars at work.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay. Look, do I know if these are going to work? I don’t know, but I think they’re worth trying. And as a frame of reference, I’m just going to put it out there for you. I talk to a lot of people. I meet a lot of people. I’ve seen a lot of organizations. The things you’re listing here are not wildly exorbitant to at least try. Even this notion of no meetings on Mondays, you’re having a meeting. It’s just not with other people.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think it would be helpful for you to just at least pilot.
SARAH: We’re not over committing.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right. Not yet, because I sense your hesitation, so why don’t we pilot these practices, okay? And they are your protective gear, your firefighting gear. In case the fire comes, you’re ready, your armor.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I also think it would be worthwhile to go back to this sense of satisfaction that you get from chasing the list to getting things done and being there for other people to rescue, which is a form of getting things done. You framed it as a sense of satisfaction. I get the sense that it also is how you define your success. How does that land with you when I say that?
SARAH: It definitely resonates. The year that I have spent not working has felt long and particularly aimless, and I have spent a lot of time thinking about, “Well, why has it felt so aimless?” And it’s because there’s just not the energy that I have always associated with accomplishing something and the success that comes along with that energy required to accomplish something. It definitely resonates as the definition I’ve been operating under a success in the past.
MURIEL WILKINS:
Okay. Look, if that’s how you want to define it, that’s how you want to define it. I think the question is, are you defining it in a contained way? Which goes back to like, How much do you know when you’ve accomplished enough? Because the list will never stop.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: What you said around like there’s this stress of work is never done. Well, the work is never done. There’s always going to be work. There’s always something to do.
SARAH: Sure.
MURIEL WILKINS: Until when?
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: When do you know that you’re done?
SARAH: Well, I have never known that I’ve done. I’ve only known that I’ve been done when I’ve landed in a major medical crisis.
MURIEL WILKINS: When somebody else tells you, you’re done, that’s it, Sarah. Is there the possibility that you could say, “I’m done. I’m done with this.” Or at least for today. There’s a story and I’m going to mess it up. I can’t source it, but I read it in an article somewhere about a gentleman, I believe he’s a monk, and he lives in this monastery where they work from eight o’clock in the morning till noon.
Again, I’m really messing it up, but you’ll get the point. They work from eight o’clock till noon, and then after that they don’t work. He doesn’t work. Whatever it got done by noon or 12:30, they’re done and they do serious work. It’s not like because they’re monks and all that, they’re doing serious work on the land and [inaudible 00:43:39]. There’s always something to be done, but 12:30, that’s it. Work ends. And then they go into contemplative practice and all that. The writer of this story asked this monk like, “Man, how do you deal with that? Just stopping at 12:30 knowing that you didn’t finish the things on your list.” Basically what you’re saying. And he said, “You just get over it.” You just get over it, because guess what? It’s going to be there tomorrow. It’s never done. You get over the notion that it’s never done. Now that’s putting it very bluntly.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think what this story really teaches is it’s not the issue about the work not getting done that’s the problem, it’s our discomfort with us not finishing it because we identify ourselves with finishing. So, rather than chasing finishing the list, can you work on being comfortable with that list never being finished?
SARAH: I think as I take that in, I have two reactions and I am trying to examine everything from this place of what am I bringing to the table and then what is the environment the table’s in? I’m getting a lot of green flags. I’m getting a lot of good signs from the people I’m about to go work for that we do what we do for today, and then we pick it back up tomorrow. We stop at 12:30 today and we pick it back up again tomorrow. And that makes me very excited for a fresh environment because I said earlier, “Do people actually set boundaries and have those respected?”
I’m seeing nothing but green flags that where I’m about to go is a place that will respect boundaries and that it’s my job and my work to set those boundaries and not swim upstream. I don’t want to be the one rocking the boat and being like, we have to finish, I’m going to work all night to finish this one thing. If that’s not the culture of the team, and I think having some awareness for me about like, That’s not so far what I’m seeing, how this team operates at all.
MURIEL WILKINS: Right, and not just because it’s not the culture of the team, but it’s also because it’s not what you want. At least based on what you brought to our conversation today. You don’t want to get burned out, so why would you do that? You would only do it if you’re chasing this sense of, I’m only satisfied if I work at this level. You’ve got to choose which one is it, right? Warren Buffett – people say that he said this, whether he did or not, I don’t know. I was not in the room. Basically he said like, “Make a list of all the things that you want to say yes to, all the things you want to do, and then cross out everything but the top five.” And not as like, Oh, I’m going to get to the other 50 gazillion things later. He’s like, Just say bye-bye. Right?
I’m focusing on these five. That’s it. Which is very different than the bucket list, right? The bucket list is it’s like the to-do list. Let me write down everything that I want to do and then get stressed, because I realize I only have 24 hours in a day and there’s no way in hell I can get all those things done. A different approach is to say, “Yeah, I have limits. I have 24 hours.” Or, “I have eight because I’m going to go pick up my kid at 6:00. I only have eight hours.” What is possible that I can get done in eight hours? Let me be realistic. And let me communicate that to others. That’s what’s called managing expectations. Let me focus on what the four or five things I can get done. That’s what we call prioritization.
Let me have the conversations to align around that. That’s called communication. And let’s hope, as you said, that the environment that I’m in allows me to do that, but without prioritizing, without communicating and without managing expectations, you’re just sitting there hoping that it’ll all work out in your favor, regardless of the environment. Yes, environment is important, but your role is to do the three things we just talked about. You still are going to have to do that. You’re still going to have to prioritize. You’re still going to have to be realistic about what can happen. You’re still going to have to communicate. You’re still going to have to manage expectations. Does that make sense?
SARAH: Oh, it makes complete sense.
MURIEL WILKINS: And?
SARAH: No, there’s no and. I think back, I’ve done it before. There were other jobs and other roles and responsibilities that I didn’t burn out. And as I hear you remind me of the things that I am responsible for, I did those really well. I know I can do it. I think it’s nice to have a moment to reflect on, “I have done this before.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay, that’s great.
SARAH: I don’t know where I strayed off the path, but I have done this before.
MURIEL WILKINS: Cut yourself some slack, right? You stray off the path because you went into environment where it was not welcomed or it was not possible. Maybe you did do those things and it didn’t lead to the sustainability that you wanted, okay? Everything that we’re talking about, it’s not going to guarantee that you’ll never get burned out again, but I do think it increases your chances that you’ll be aware that you’re on that path and then you can decide what to do at that time.
SARAH: Right.
MURIEL WILKINS: Okay? But you have to be careful as you’re going into this new job that you don’t say… Eyes wide open, you don’t want what happened before to happen again, in terms of the environment. You also don’t want what happened before in terms of the pattern that you fell into to happen again. Eyes wide open and recognize that it’s a new environment and as you’ve said, you’ve gotten a lot of green flags. Okay, let’s see if those green flags bear out to be true.
SARAH: Okay.
MURIEL WILKINS: All right, let’s recap. I’d love to hear how you’re feeling now versus at the beginning of our conversation.
SARAH: Man, it’s eye-opening to see my reflection in this mirror, and I think that that is empowering. I can stop letting kids in my front door. It seems so simple in that context. It seems so simple and obvious in the context of, “Hey guys, ring the doorbell first.” And how far away I had gotten from the practice of saying, “Ring the doorbell.” And it’s just that simple. There’s no morality attached to it. There’s no winning over anybody’s approval. It’s not attached to my ability to be successful. I just had forgotten to say like, “Ring the doorbell.” In that context, it feels a lot easier to think like, “I can say ring the doorbell.” I think that I came into this conversation thinking that I had some really enormous hurdles to break down before I start this new job. When in reality it’s just, “Okay, ring the doorbell.”
MURIEL WILKINS: Yeah, I love it.
SARAH: It’s not hard.
MURIEL WILKINS: I love it. Ring the doorbell. Okay.
SARAH: Yeah.
MURIEL WILKINS: I think that’s a great mantra to use.
SARAH: Yeah. Ring the doorbell.
MURIEL WILKINS: And they can still get a hug after they ring the doorbell. How about that?
SARAH: Exactly. I still get to be the person I want to be once they’re in my house, but we’re just not starting from a place of assuming that you’re barging into my house.
MURIEL WILKINS: That’s right. That’s right. Wonderful. All right, Sarahs, let me know how it goes.
SARAH: I will. Thank you so much, Muriel. I appreciate it.
MURIEL WILKINS: When you’re facing a situation like Sarah, awareness is important, as I’ve said, but so is acceptance – because a lot of her strategy around going into this new role and looking to avoid burnout is also being comfortable with the idea that the to-do list will never be done, and that’s okay. The lessons from this conversation are really important for many people, even if they aren’t currently changing roles or facing burnout, because by the time you realize you’re burned out, it might be too late to make the small changes to fix the situation. It’s great to be proactive and you can test out those small changes. It’s good to remember that piloting these practices also means you don’t have to do anything forever, but try some experiments. It’s the only way to know if doing something differently will lead to different results.
That’s it for this episode of
Coaching Real Leaders
and for this season. We’ll be taking a hiatus over the summer. As we’ve learned today, breaks are good for everyone to reset and refresh. In the meantime, you can catch up on any past episodes you’ve missed in your favorite podcast app. And before you go, I have a really important ask of you. If you love these coaching conversations, it would mean the world to me if you head over to Apple, Spotify or wherever you listen and leave a five-star review.
Better yet, share it with your friends and family and encourage them to subscribe. If you want more of
Coaching Real Leaders
, join my community where I host live discussions to unpack every episode and answer your questions. Become a member at coachingrealleaderscommunity.com. You can also connect with me on LinkedIn at Muriel Wilkins. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dooe; sound editor, Nick Crnko; music composer, Brian Campbell; my assistant, Emily Sofa; and the entire team at HBR. Much gratitude to the leaders who join me in these coaching conversations and to you, our listeners, who share in their journeys. If you are dealing with a leadership challenge, I’d love to hear from you and possibly have you on the show. Apply at coachingrealleaders.com. From HBR podcast network, I’m Muriel Wilkins. Until next time, be well.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 8 of Coaching Real Leaders
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Sometimes in your career you reach a crossroads and you need help deciding which direction to go.
SPEAKER 2: I guess I feel quite certain in my mind that it’s time to make a change, and most of my career has just positioned me for what I guess is objectively speaking kind of a traditionally big job – a C-level executive at a public company-type role. And now that I find myself kind of at the precipice of that next logical step, I feel pretty uncertain.
MURIEL WILKINS: Other times the career path you’re on leads right into a brick wall and you’re unsure how to get through it.
SPEAKER 3: I was required to be a certain person in some of those situations with this dynamic around me and my boss not necessarily having a good relationship, but I should have put that aspect aside and still showed up. And the fact that I didn’t show up made me reflect and think,
Well, why is it that you’re acting different in this situation?
It kind of felt like
The Wizard of Oz
, and I’m the Lion who’s chasing courage or trying to understand where his courage is.
MURIEL WILKINS: No matter what obstacles you’re facing in your career as a leader, coaching can help, and that’s where I come in. I’m leadership coach Muriel Wilkins, and the new season of my podcast
Coaching Real Leaders
starts October 7th. We’ll look at all kinds of leadership issues – from feeling like you’ve hit a plateau, to navigating a new office culture, to balancing a dual-career household. And we’ll reach some breakthroughs as well, which I hope will help you in your own career.
SPEAKER 4: The key takeaway for me is to go back and reevaluate where I’m at professionally now, where I want to be professionally. The word that keeps bubbling up as I am hearing your feedback and thinking about what you’re saying is, I reject any ceilings that should be above me. And this feels like a ceiling, and I need to crack through that through realigning my professional goals with who I want to be.
MURIEL WILKINS: Subscribe, rate, and review in your favorite podcast app to not miss any of season eight of
Coaching Real Leaders
.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: How To Make the Most of Your Work Day (from Working It)
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Hi everyone. it’s Muriel. We’re hard at work on our new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
, and I’m excited to share that we’ll begin dropping new episodes on October 7th. While we get these new episodes together, I have something special to share with you, it’s an episode from an award-winning podcast at the Financial Times that I think you’ll like, it’s called
Working It
. Every Wednesday, the FT’s Isabel Berwick speaks to experts on how to become a better manager and leader, helps people make sense of the trends shaping the world of work, and sources advice on how to improve productivity. There’s one particular episode of
Working It
that I really love and I want to share it with you here. It’s about why different people work better at different times of the day.
We all experience peaks and troughs over the course of a working day, and knowing how to manage them can make us much more productive. In this episode, bestselling author Daniel Pink explains why people work best at different times of the day and how we can harness those differences to do our best work. I hope you enjoy the conversation. Here it is.
DANIEL PINK: I think the key is to give people greater sovereignty over the when of their work, measure people by the results, and allow them to configure their schedules in a way that works for them. Most people actually want to do a decent job and care about their work, so give them the freedom to do that.
ISABEL BERWICK: Hello and welcome to
Working It
from the Financial Times. I’m Isabel Berwick. If you’re anything like me, your energy levels vary drastically throughout the day. I start strong, fuel myself with caffeine, then slump after lunch. Daily ups and downs are a fact of life, but that doesn’t mean we can’t work around them. In fact, learning how to manage changes in your energy levels could help you get more out of your day. So, how can we use our natural rhythms to do better work? What should you do if you are a night owl in a company that favors early birds? And if you’re managing people, how can you give them the flexibility to get the most out of their days? To find out, I spoke to Daniel Pink. Daniel’s the author of several books, including
When: The Scientific Secrets of Perfect Timing
. I started by asking him whether most people’s daily energy levels follow a similar pattern to mine.
DANIEL PINK: In general, what we see, there’s some variation based on chronotypes, whether you go to sleep early and wake up early, or whether you go to sleep late and wake up late, but in general, people seem to move through the day in three stages. There’s a peak typically early in the day. There’s a trough, typically in the middle of the day, and there’s a recovery later in the day. And that pattern seems to hold very strongly for mood. Performance is a little bit more complicated, but performance, particularly on heads down analytic tasks seems to follow that pattern too. What we’re trying to do here, in general, is we’re trying to line up three things. We’re trying to line up our type, our time, and our task. Some tasks require heads down, analytic firepower and focus, others require you to be slightly looser, things like iterating new ideas or brainstorming. What we want to try to do is line up those three things, our type, the time, and our task.
ISABEL BERWICK: Is there a kind of aggregate for humanity? I think these types are sometimes called larks and owls, are there?
DANIEL PINK: Yeah, yeah.
ISABEL BERWICK: Is there a split down the middle or are there more larks than owls or do we not know?
DANIEL PINK: Some of us, about 15% are very, very strong larks. Some of us, about 20% are very, very strong owls, and most of us, about two-thirds of us are in the middle, but we lean toward larkiness. And so, what you have is you have about 80% of the population moving through the day in those three patterns, peak, early, trough in the middle, recovery later in the day. About 80% of us go that way. For owls, they hit their peak, that is their peak of vigilance, their peak of focus, their peak of analytic firepower, much, much, much, much, much later in the day. Sometimes at 6:00 PM or 7:00 PM or 8:00 PM or midnight, the times that people like me are dead asleep.
ISABEL BERWICK: So, do you think the pandemic and flexible work has helped the owls? Are they being more vocal and explicit about their late blooming?
DANIEL PINK: I do think that one of the things we’re discovering about remote work is the where of the work might be less important than giving people some control over the when of the work, so that people can configure their schedules that are best for them, both for things like taking care of kids or doing household chores, but also it allows the owls to be themselves. If you’re being measured mostly on results, not on whether you’re physically present in an office, you can configure your schedule to get the work done when you’re best at getting that work done. So, I think that at some level, remote work can be an owl liberation movement.
ISABEL BERWICK: So, let’s say you’re in a workplace where your chronotype doesn’t match those of your colleagues, should you fight it or can you lean into it somewhat?
DANIEL PINK: Fighting your chronotype is generally not a good idea, only because it’s an attribute of your physiology. There’s a limited malleability to it, but to me, fighting your chronotype is like fighting your height. What you should be doing is, especially if you’re a night owl working in a larky environment, talk to your manager, talk to your boss and explain when you do your best work and offer to do some pilot or some kind of experiment that gives you a little bit more control over that. If you’re a manager and you have people who are night owls, do not make them go to an 8:00 in the morning meeting. Do not require them to show up at the same time that everybody else shows up. Give people challenging assignments, a lot of support, and measure them based on their results. Measure them on output rather than on input.
ISABEL BERWICK: So, for most of us, we have to struggle through the troughs in our day, or do you think we should just get up, leave our desks entirely and take a break? What’s the best way to go or eat a chocolate bar in my case?
DANIEL PINK: So, what can you do? I think there are a couple of things, the two main strategies for addressing that trough, one of them is putting the right work in the right time of day. The trough to me is the ideal time for administrative work, work that doesn’t require massive analytic ability, nor does it require massive creativity, things like filling out your expense reports, answering routine email. If you can push those into the trough period, you’re going to be better off. The trouble is that we often do not do that. There are people, including me, who get seduced into answering routine email first thing in the morning because it gives us the slight dopamine hit of getting something done. That is an enormous mistake. What we should be doing is we should be doing our analytic work, heads down focus work, crunching numbers, writing reports during our peak, and we should be pushing as much of our administrative work to that trough period. That’s one thing.
The second thing that we can do is we should be taking more breaks and we should be taking certain kinds of breaks. There’s some very good research on breaks, and what it tells us at a top level is that breaks are not a sign of weakness. Breaks are not a deviation from our performance. Breaks are part of our performance, and so taking regular breaks, especially during that trough period is essential. We know a lot about the principles of effective breaks. We know that something is better than nothing, so even a one minute break is better than simply powering through. We know that outside is better than inside. We know massively that moving is better than stationary.
We know, this is interesting I thought, that breaks with other people are more restorative than breaks on your own, that social beats solo, and this is true even for introverts. And finally, we know that the best breaks are fully detached, that is you’re not taking a walk outside looking at your phone. What this suggests for white collar workers, really, around the world is a platonic ideal of the perfect break, which is go out on a 15 minute walk break outside with someone you like, leaving your phone behind, talking about something other than work.
ISABEL BERWICK: I think that’s brilliant and actually quite easy to implement.
DANIEL PINK: It is. What I have found is that especially hard chargers might nod their head at that, but never actually do it. What I’ve done for myself is to put it in my calendar. I want people to have their calendars pop up a 15 minute afternoon walk break, and then abide by it. And I think we’ll see much greater happiness and much greater productivity in the workplace.
ISABEL BERWICK: Have you come across any managers who actually do that, who insist on breaks for their workers?
DANIEL PINK: No, but I haven’t unfortunately. But I think your underlying analysis is spot on, that this is really about managers. To my mind, the best thing managers can do is model it. So, what I think would be a victory for workers everywhere would be in some company somewhere, somebody in the afternoon going around looking for the CEO and not being able to find her because she was out on a 15 minute walk break, and the reaction to that is, “Oh man, I want to be just like Maria. She’s such a badass, she takes a break every day.”
ISABEL BERWICK: I love that. So, just to wrap up, for slightly more, I don’t know, forward looking managers or companies, are there any more slightly out there things they could do to help workers match work to their chronotypes?
DANIEL PINK: I think the key is to give people greater sovereignty over the when of their work. Measure people by the results and allow them to configure their schedules in a way that works for them, both biologically the chronotype, and also socially, what their family situation is.
ISABEL BERWICK: Oh, as so often in the world of work, there is a simple solution out there that people often ignore it.
DANIEL PINK: I think that’s right. Most people actually want to do a decent job and care about their work, so give them the freedom to do that.
ISABEL BERWICK: Daniel, thank you so much. It’s been absolutely illuminating.
DANIEL PINK: It’s a total pleasure. Thanks for having me on the show.
ISABEL BERWICK: Dan’s wisdom is dead simple. If people work best at a certain time, give them the freedom to work at that time. What people do not when they do it is what matters. The next guest on today’s show shares that philosophy. Aaron Levie is the CEO and Co-founder of Box a content management and file sharing company based in California. But unlike some Silicon Valley CEOs, Aaron is more likely to be dozing at 6:00 AM than meditating or going for an ice bath. He is what DANIEL PINK would call a night owl. How does Aaron run a multi-billion dollar company when he hates getting up early? Our producer, Mischa Frankl-Duval spoke to him to find out.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Aaron Levie, welcome to
Working It
.
AARON LEVIE: Thanks. Yeah, good to be here.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Could you please start off by telling us a little bit about who you are and what you do?
AARON LEVIE: Sure. So, I’m the CEO and co-founder of Box, and we’re an enterprise software company that helps companies manage their most important data.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: What do you do in your day-to-day? What does it look like both from a personal perspective and a business perspective?
AARON LEVIE: So, most days are a little bit different, so there’s never exactly a typical week, but ideally if I can see the kids in the morning and then right out of the gate, I’m just in basically meetings throughout the day with customers, building products, designing software. And then the typical workday ends around 5:00 or 6:00-ish. If I’m in town, go home, have dinner with the kids, put them down, try and spend a little bit time with my wife, and then it’s back to work again from 7:30, 8:00 PM onward, and that takes me into about midnight, 1:00 AM and then just rinse and repeat that.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: So, what time do you get started if you were working until 12:00, 1:00?
AARON LEVIE: On the work side, I probably don’t totally kick off until about 9:30, 10:00 AM.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Fair to say you’re not a 5:00 AM kind of guy then?
AARON LEVIE: Correct.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Is this something that marks you out or do people leave you alone about it?
AARON LEVIE: I think that there’s an even divide probably in the tech community. I have many friends who can get up at 5:00 AM and go on a run, and probably before I’ve even woken up, they’ve done about 35 more things than myself answered every email and gone on a 60 minute run. That is not me. I not only wouldn’t be able to do the run in the first place, but just for some reason my brain cannot turn on before 9:00 or 10:00 in the morning. It’s just not possible. So, at night time is when I really get most of my energy. So, when I’m at my best, it’s usually the evening time, thinking about problems to solve, responding to issues in the business. So, definitely I’m a bit more nocturnal in that sense.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: I’d be really interested to know, we’re speaking about flex in schedules and how people work best at different times of the day. How has your view of that changed as a manager and as a leader? Are you quite permissive of very flexible schedules? Where’s the line? How do you balance knowing that people need to do things at different times with common good and collaborative hours?
AARON LEVIE: Yeah, it’s definitely a never ending tension to figure out what’s the shared agreement of how we all work versus what is the most optimal way that any one individual can be productive and have their impact. If everybody had the same commute, had the exact same level of in-person experience of working, I would argue that everybody working five days a week in an office would be optimal. But that’s not reality, people are different, they live in different places, they have different schedules, they have different family dynamics. So, then you have to find what is that equilibrium where you’re getting the most amount of productivity with the most amount of employee satisfaction. It’s a little bit of this push-pull on every dimension. That could be hybrid work, that could be hours of day working, that could be how distributed our teams, all that kind of stuff. We’re always seeking what is that optimal equilibrium, how do we kind of make the most of everybody’s newfound flexibility, but also make sure that there’s a clarity to how we’re going to execute as a collective. That’s always this balance we’re trying to find.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Are you conscious of other people’s circadian rhythms to an extent? Do you know that if I speak to person X at this hour, I’m going to get less out of them than at this hour?
AARON LEVIE: Yes. I’d say of the 20 to 30 people that I most actively work with, I generally know their sleep patterns in as least of a creepy way as possible.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL:
Sure. How does that manifest itself with when you plan their meetings or how does it work from a managerial perspective?
AARON LEVIE:Yeah, there are absolutely some people where … and this will probably make some people pass out listening to this … but our CTO – who’s the chief technology officer – and I spent a lot of time brainstorming. It’s not uncommon that we’re doing a brainstorm at 12:30 AM on Sunday. So, think about that as Saturday night bleeding over into Sunday morning. That’s actually what he wants to do and that’s what I want to do. We’re both deeply interested in the topic and both of our sleep patterns are wired to being able to do that. And then there are people where on a weekday at 10:00 PM, I just know that they really are going to go to bed because they’re one of these 6:00 AM going to go work out people.
And so, I’m pushing the limits on either how much productivity I’m going to get from them and/or just now encroaching into health on their side. I try and be somewhat responsive to that. There’s always exceptions because of something demanding in the business, but I wouldn’t get the sense that there’s hundreds of people doing 10:00 PM meetings every single day across the company as a result of my sleep pattern. This is small clusters when there’s really important work that just has to be complete.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: I’m interested in the origin story, which I know you’ve talked about before. You started this with friends from middle school and high school, and I’ve read that you did these rotational shifts at points to make sure your site stayed up in early days of working together. Do you think there’s any element of that that was either an early sign of how you work best or has somehow had an impact on the way you work now, in terms of hours in the day and the get the job done at the hours that suit you best mentality?
AARON LEVIE: Yeah, so certainly the origin story is correlated with how the company has developed on this dimension. We were working out of one garage sleeping in the other garage, and it was just literally 24/7. Our breaks were food breaks and somebody was always on call watching the site. Three of us had extreme nocturnal patterns, we could all be up till 4:00 AM working on something. One of our co-founders, my CFO and still CFO, he’s the go to bed at 10:00 PM, going to go on a run in the morning type personality. What would be funny is, he’d go to bed at 10:00 PM, we’d all be up until 2:00, 3:00 AM, he might wake up and literally, our business model might have actually evolved. It’s sort of a funny concept, you go to bed and you wake up and your company has meaningfully changed in direction. That was just the early days of how we operated. That is not fully sustained, but the kind of people that we work with, and certainly I haven’t changed that much from that standpoint.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: So, do people wake up to big changes in strategy now or is that a thing of the past?
AARON LEVIE: I’m a little bit more thoughtful about the thrash that that can create, but the past two chief operating officers and our current chief operating officer, we’ll be jamming on strategy at 11:00 PM and so it’s not totally impossible that somebody wakes up to a different strategy the next morning. But now with 2,700 employees or so, it’s much more important to make these decisions with the right level of research and thinking and judgment applied to it, as opposed to when we were just starting out working and sleeping in the same place, we would literally pivot the business in the middle of the night and we don’t do that anymore.
MISCHA FRANKL-DUVAL: Aaron, thank you so much.
AARON LEVIE: Thank you.
ISABEL BERWICK: Aaron sussed out a schedule that works for him. What he said about his work and sleep pattern brought me back to something Daniel said earlier, “You can’t fight your chronotype.” As far as possible you should lean into it, match the type of task you’re doing to the time you are doing it. Don’t schedule your hardest task for a time of day when you know your energy levels will be low. It sounds simple, but it could make a big difference. If you manage people, try to be conscious of when they do their best work too. Don’t call a 9:00 AM with someone who doesn’t start firing until mid-morning, you won’t get the best out of them.
MURIEL WILKINS: I hope you enjoyed that episode of
Working It
from The Financial Times. You can listen to more episodes for free wherever you get your podcasts.
Coaching Real Leaders
will be back on October 7th with our next season. We’ve been working hard on our new episodes and I’m so excited to share them with you. Thanks to my producer, Mary Dew, sound editor Nate Crnko, music composer Brian Campbell, my assistant Emily Sofa, and the entire team at HBR. From HBR Presents, I’m Muriel Wilkins, until next time, may you be well.


================================================================================
Episode Unknown: Coming Soon: Season 7
Year: 2024
================================================================================

MURIEL WILKINS: Have you ever accepted a new opportunity but yearn to get back to doing what you really love and what you think you really excel at?
SPEAKER 2: I’d like to get back to what I consider the role where I shine the most, and also the role that brings me the most happiness. I’m very clear on why that role is so attractive to me or why I enjoy it so much. It’s because it’s one that you never master. I’m used to aiming for a target, delivering and then looking for the next challenge.
MURIEL WILKINS: Have you ever felt like you should be getting more done but are already putting in so much work?
SPEAKER 3: It’s like, okay, yeah, I know I can move the needle, I can chalk up some wins, I can help people grow, I can get some things done, but at the end of the day and at the end of the month and at the end of the quarter and at the end of the year, there’s got to be something left.
MURIEL WILKINS: Have you ever experienced burnout and hope to avoid dealing with it again when you take on a new role?
SPEAKER 4: I love work. I love working. I love the satisfaction of working. So, I was very intentional about I want my next job to be smaller. I intentionally took an individual contributor role in a capacity that I think I can bring a lot of value. So now, as I start my new job in a few days and as I look ahead, I am asking myself the question: how do you stay out of burnout this time?
MURIEL WILKINS: I’m leadership coach Muriel Wilkins, and I’m so excited to share that a new season of
Coaching Real Leaders
is just around the corner. Join me as they coach leaders from around the world, from different industries and at different career levels, but all with one thing in common: they feel stuck with a professional challenge they’re facing. My job is to help them get unstuck. Let’s peel back the curtain on executive coaching and learn how you can apply these leadership lessons to your own career. Season seven of
Coaching Real Leaders
starts March 11th. Subscribe now on your favorite podcast app so you don’t miss an episode.

